WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton is blaming the FBI's decision to revive its examination of her email accounts for her devastating defeat in the presidential race.  On a call with top campaign donors, Clinton says her campaign had been winning the race against Donald Trump until FBI director James Comey's letter to Congress.  The letter sent on Oct. 28 announced that the FBI had uncovered emails possibly related to its earlier probe into Clinton's use of a private server as secretary of state.  Trump's campaign and Republican supporters seized on the news, even though it was unclear whether Clinton's correspondence was tied up in the probe.  Donors on the call Saturday were not authorized to discuss her comments by name and requested anonymity to describe them to The Associated Press.
WASHINGTON — Donald Trump is pledging restraint on Twitter as president.  But you can already tell he'll be mightily tempted to let loose with those trademark tweets.  He tells "60 Minutes" he's going to be "very restrained, if I use it at all."  But he went on to call Twitter "tremendous" and said social media is "where it's at."  As he put it: "I have a method of fighting back."  The president-elect says social media helped him win races in states where he was vastly outspent, and he thinks he's proved that the medium can be more powerful than money.  Some of Trump's most provocative comments in the primary and general election campaigns came from his tweets, often late at night.  The "60 Minutes" interview will be broadcast Sunday.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Even as President-elect Donald J. Trump vows to unify a divided nation, he faces a momentous decision over whether to make good on his oft-repeated campaign pledge to have a special prosecutor “lock up” Hillary Clinton.  That decision will signal whether Mr. Trump intends to look ahead and “bind the wounds of division,” as he pledged to do in his acceptance speech early Wednesday, or look back and settle political scores, as he often seemed inclined to do during his campaign.  The possibility of a new investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s email server has forced the White House to field questions about whether President Obama might offer Mrs. Clinton a pardon to insulate her from criminal charges.  Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman, said last week that he would not discuss Mr. Obama’s thinking on any particular case for clemency, but he sent a strong signal that it would be inappropriate for Mr. Trump to revive the Clinton investigation.  He told reporters that the country had a long tradition of political leaders’ “not using the criminal justice system to exact political revenge.” Mr. Earnest said that “in fact, we go to great lengths to insulate our criminal justice system from partisan politics,” adding that “the president is hopeful that it will continue.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Chants of “lock her up” became a frequent rallying cry at Trump campaign events, and Mr. Trump told Mrs. Clinton at the second presidential debate that if elected, he would instruct his attorney general “to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation because there has never been so many lies, so much deception.”  If he were president, he told her, “you’d be in jail.” That threat unnerved both Republican and Democratic legal analysts.  The decision he faces echoes one confronted by Mr. Obama and his first attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., over whether to investigate Bush administration officials for extreme interrogation tactics against terrorism suspects that the Obama administration later deemed to be torture.  While Mr. Holder said the country was owed “a reckoning” for torture carried out after the Sept. 11 attacks, the Obama administration ultimately did not conduct a broad criminal investigation. Mr. Obama declared that “we need to look forward, as opposed to looking backwards.”  The F.B.I. has concluded two times, including after a surprise review that began just 11 days before the election, that Mrs. Clinton should not face criminal prosecution over her handling of her private email server. Mrs. Clinton on Saturday blamed her loss in part on the F.B.I.’s last-minute intervention.  Even so, legal analysts said there was little doubt that as president, Mr. Trump would have the power to direct his attorney general — Rudolph W. Giuliani has been frequently mentioned for the job — to appoint an outside special counsel to reinvestigate the matter in light of new evidence that may have developed.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In an interview with The Wall Street Journal that was published on Friday, Mr. Trump deflected a question about naming a special prosecutor.  “It’s not something I’ve given a lot of thought, because I want to solve health care, jobs, border control, tax reform,” he said.  But his top aides have left the door open to such a move.  In an appearance Thursday on Fox News, Mr. Giuliani — a top adviser to Mr. Trump on legal and national security issues — said he did not think that Mr. Obama should pardon Mrs. Clinton, and he raised the prospect that the Trump administration could investigate not only the private email server, but also the Clinton Foundation, the family charity. Several F.B.I. offices are known to have examined questions about the charity’s acceptance of gifts from foreign leaders, but those inquiries appear to have been paused.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Giuliani said that during the campaign Mr. Trump had “talked about an independent counsel doing it, who would be not a Republican, not a Democrat, somebody free of any political question.”  The decision about appointing a special prosecutor is a “tough” one, Mr. Giuliani said in a separate appearance on CNN. “It’s been a tradition in our politics to put things behind us,” he said. “On the other hand, you have to look at, how bad was it?”  Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, has also not ruled out a special counsel investigation, saying a decision would come “all in good time.”  But Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who is also a Trump adviser, seemed to discourage talk of prosecuting Mrs. Clinton when he was asked about it Thursday on NBC’s “Today” show. “People get to speak through their vote, and they voted for Donald Trump to be the president of the United States,” Mr. Christie said. “It is now his job, and I am confident he will bring the country together.”  However, Mr. Christie’s influence in the Trump camp appears to be waning. A day after that interview, he was demoted from chief of the Trump transition team in favor of Vice President-elect Mike Pence. Mr. Christie was made a vice chairman.  Democrats say the lingering threats to “lock up” Mrs. Clinton are alarming. They say they hope that Mr. Trump, who has already shown signs of backing away from other campaign pledges, most notably his vow to repeal the Affordable Care Act entirely, will do the same when it comes to threats of prosecuting his defeated rival.  “It would be very, very unwise, in my view, for a new attorney general, acting presumably on the orders of the president, to start out a new administration on this note,” Richard Ben-Veniste, a prominent Democratic lawyer in Washington, said in a telephone interview. “It would be mimicking the tin-pot dictators of historical disgrace who seek to punish those who have run against them.”
“A new president is really vulnerable and open to all sorts of influence by strong-willed advisers,” said Robert Dallek, a presidential historian. “Trump’s appointments over the next six weeks will be very significant because they can show whether he wants to create some unity in the country, or whether he really intends to deliver on his ideas.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  One of the influences on Mr. Trump could come from an unlikely quarter: President Obama. Meeting in the Oval Office on Thursday, Mr. Trump said he looked forward “to dealing with the president in the future, including counsel.” A day later, in interviews with The Wall Street Journal and “60 Minutes,’’ he said he had decided to retain elements of Mr. Obama’s landmark health care law after their conversation — a hint, at least, that he might govern less radically than he had campaigned.  White House officials expressed hope that Mr. Obama would be able to impress on Mr. Trump the importance of other parts of his legacy, like the Paris climate accord and the Iran nuclear deal. The two will have the kind of peer-to-peer relationship that only fellow presidents can have — something that administration officials hope will appeal to Mr. Trump’s pride, as well as his desire to succeed, and make him view Mr. Obama less as a rival.  They conceded, though, that there was little historical precedent for such a relationship, especially when the incoming president had ousted the incumbent’s party after such an acrid campaign, and that Mr. Trump and Mr. Obama were never likely to become buddies.  Mr. Trump is drawing mainly from a pool of trusted aides and supporters, according to people familiar with the campaign. On Friday, he named three of his grown children — Ivanka, Donald Jr. and Eric — as well as his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, to his transition team, an arrangement that rang alarm bells in Washington because they will also manage his businesses. The Trump family, it is clear, will wield unusual power in the composition of an administration that is already shaping up as remarkable for its clannishness.  Even within Mr. Trump’s tight circle, however, there are sharp differences in ideology, background and temperament that could play out in how the White House deals with Congress and how the United States deals with the rest of the world.  Perhaps the deepest schism is between Stephen K. Bannon, the conservative provocateur and media entrepreneur who was Mr. Trump’s campaign chairman, and Reince Priebus, the Republican Party chairman who came to terms with Mr. Trump’s candidacy. Both are on a short list for chief of staff, according to people close to the campaign, and whoever is chosen, the other is likely to get another senior White House post.  Each would bring a radically different approach to a job often called the second-most powerful in Washington — gatekeeper to the president and often the first and last person he sees in the Oval Office.  Mr. Bannon, the executive chairman of the conservative website Breitbart News and one-time Goldman Sachs executive, is an avowed enemy of House Speaker Paul D. Ryan. An anti-establishment verbal bomb thrower with ties to the alt-right movement, Mr. Bannon may have little interest in compromising with the Republican-controlled Congress under its current leadership. He is an unabashed critic of the current immigration system and repeatedly encouraged Mr. Trump to appeal to the party’s base in the closing days of the campaign with arguments against globalization.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Priebus, a party loyalist who tried to reconcile Republican leaders with their renegade nominee, would most likely build bridges to Mr. Ryan and other Republican leaders. A Washington insider with a reputation for being easy to work with, Mr. Priebus would operate a more traditional White House, though given Mr. Trump’s flamboyant personality, traditional is a relative term.  Photo  In some ways, Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus are proxies for the larger battle over what kind of president Mr. Trump will be. Some former Republican officials held out hope that Mr. Trump would be receptive to moderating influences, but others worried that he would simply listen to the last person he spoke to.  “You always have that tension between what he said to get elected and what he actually believes,” said John D. Negroponte, a former director of national intelligence under President George W. Bush. “How selective will his amnesia be?”  Mr. Negroponte, a Republican who supported Hillary Clinton in the campaign, said he could imagine senior members of Mr. Trump’s National Security Council warning him about the dangers of “cutting loose countries from our nuclear umbrella,” which Mr. Trump threatened during the campaign to do in reference to Japan and South Korea.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But there could be a parallel battle for Mr. Trump’s soul in foreign policy. Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn, a retired career intelligence officer who is Mr. Trump’s closest foreign-policy adviser, is a candidate for national security adviser, according to an internal transition document obtained by the conservative news site The Daily Caller, as is Stephen J. Hadley, who served in that capacity for Mr. Bush.  Mr. Hadley, who might also be considered for defense secretary, pushed Mr. Bush to undertake the troop surge in Iraq and is closely identified with the military interventionism of that administration. A key figure in the Republican foreign-policy establishment, Mr. Hadley had a hand in Mr. Bush’s second inaugural address, in which he called for the United States to be an evangelist in spreading democracy — something Mr. Trump has flatly rejected.  General Flynn, a registered Democrat, has criticized the neoconservative policies of the Bush administration for leading the United States into quagmires like Iraq. “They’ve gotten us into mess after mess for the wrong reasons,” he said, echoing Mr. Trump’s harsh criticism of Mr. Bush during the Republican debates. And like Mr. Trump, General Flynn is withering about the foreign-policy establishment of both parties.  It may seem counterintuitive for Mr. Trump to recruit a Bush administration veteran. But Peter D. Feaver, who worked on President Bush’s national security council and now teaches at Duke University, pointed out that Mr. Obama had campaigned “vociferously against the Iraq surge, and then asked the architect of the surge” — Robert M. Gates — “to stay.” Mr. Gates, as defense secretary, later persuaded Mr. Obama to deploy a similar surge in Afghanistan.  “You can say one thing in campaigns, and mean it,” Mr. Feaver said, “and in personnel matters, do the opposite.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The contest for top economic posts does not expose the same ideological fault lines as those for the White House or national security jobs. But it does raise red flags, given the anti-establishment, anti-Wall Street sentiment that Mr. Trump stoked during the campaign.  Several of the candidates on his short list for Treasury secretary come from Wall Street, including Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs partner who was the finance chairman of Mr. Trump’s campaign, and Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase. People close to Mr. Dimon said he was not interested in the job.  Another candidate is a conservative Texas congressman, Jeb Hensarling, who has called for the repeal the Dodd-Frank Act, the banking regulations passed after the financial crisis, during Mr. Obama’s first term.  The least predictable source of influence on Mr. Trump remains Mr. Obama. For all their differences, and the bitter words they flung at each other during the campaign, the two share traits. Both won the presidency as outsiders, and both hold their party’s foreign-policy establishment in contempt.  With Mr. Trump lacking elective-office experience or the political coterie that accompanies establishment candidates to Washington, administration officials said Mr. Obama would probably spend more time with him than was typical for other incoming and outgoing presidents.  And Mr. Trump, some outsiders predicted, would respect the advice of a president 15 years younger, whose path to the White House was nearly as improbable as his.  “If you’re looking at things from a hiring point of view, as Trump does, Obama could have done anything he wanted,” Douglas Brinkley, a professor of history at Rice University, said in reference to Mr. Obama’s career options. “That has to impress Trump.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — Even as President-elect Donald J. Trump vows to unify a divided nation, he faces a momentous decision over whether to make good on his oft-repeated campaign pledge to have a special prosecutor “lock up” Hillary Clinton.  That decision will signal whether Mr. Trump intends to look ahead and “bind the wounds of division,” as he pledged to do in his acceptance speech early Wednesday, or look back and settle political scores, as he often seemed inclined to do during his campaign.  The possibility of a new investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s email server has forced the White House to field questions about whether President Obama might offer Mrs. Clinton a pardon to insulate her from criminal charges.  Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman, said last week that he would not discuss Mr. Obama’s thinking on any particular case for clemency, but he sent a strong signal that it would be inappropriate for Mr. Trump to revive the Clinton investigation.  He told reporters that the country had a long tradition of political leaders’ “not using the criminal justice system to exact political revenge.” Mr. Earnest said that “in fact, we go to great lengths to insulate our criminal justice system from partisan politics,” adding that “the president is hopeful that it will continue.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Chants of “lock her up” became a frequent rallying cry at Trump campaign events, and Mr. Trump told Mrs. Clinton at the second presidential debate that if elected, he would instruct his attorney general “to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation because there has never been so many lies, so much deception.”  If he were president, he told her, “you’d be in jail.” That threat unnerved both Republican and Democratic legal analysts.  The decision he faces echoes one confronted by Mr. Obama and his first attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., over whether to investigate Bush administration officials for extreme interrogation tactics against terrorism suspects that the Obama administration later deemed to be torture.  While Mr. Holder said the country was owed “a reckoning” for torture carried out after the Sept. 11 attacks, the Obama administration ultimately did not conduct a broad criminal investigation. Mr. Obama declared that “we need to look forward, as opposed to looking backwards.”  The F.B.I. has concluded two times, including after a surprise review that began just 11 days before the election, that Mrs. Clinton should not face criminal prosecution over her handling of her private email server. Mrs. Clinton on Saturday blamed her loss in part on the F.B.I.’s last-minute intervention.  Even so, legal analysts said there was little doubt that as president, Mr. Trump would have the power to direct his attorney general — Rudolph W. Giuliani has been frequently mentioned for the job — to appoint an outside special counsel to reinvestigate the matter in light of new evidence that may have developed.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In an interview with The Wall Street Journal that was published on Friday, Mr. Trump deflected a question about naming a special prosecutor.  “It’s not something I’ve given a lot of thought, because I want to solve health care, jobs, border control, tax reform,” he said.  But his top aides have left the door open to such a move.  In an appearance Thursday on Fox News, Mr. Giuliani — a top adviser to Mr. Trump on legal and national security issues — said he did not think that Mr. Obama should pardon Mrs. Clinton, and he raised the prospect that the Trump administration could investigate not only the private email server, but also the Clinton Foundation, the family charity. Several F.B.I. offices are known to have examined questions about the charity’s acceptance of gifts from foreign leaders, but those inquiries appear to have been paused.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Giuliani said that during the campaign Mr. Trump had “talked about an independent counsel doing it, who would be not a Republican, not a Democrat, somebody free of any political question.”  The decision about appointing a special prosecutor is a “tough” one, Mr. Giuliani said in a separate appearance on CNN. “It’s been a tradition in our politics to put things behind us,” he said. “On the other hand, you have to look at, how bad was it?”  Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, has also not ruled out a special counsel investigation, saying a decision would come “all in good time.”  But Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who is also a Trump adviser, seemed to discourage talk of prosecuting Mrs. Clinton when he was asked about it Thursday on NBC’s “Today” show. “People get to speak through their vote, and they voted for Donald Trump to be the president of the United States,” Mr. Christie said. “It is now his job, and I am confident he will bring the country together.”  However, Mr. Christie’s influence in the Trump camp appears to be waning. A day after that interview, he was demoted from chief of the Trump transition team in favor of Vice President-elect Mike Pence. Mr. Christie was made a vice chairman.  Democrats say the lingering threats to “lock up” Mrs. Clinton are alarming. They say they hope that Mr. Trump, who has already shown signs of backing away from other campaign pledges, most notably his vow to repeal the Affordable Care Act entirely, will do the same when it comes to threats of prosecuting his defeated rival.  “It would be very, very unwise, in my view, for a new attorney general, acting presumably on the orders of the president, to start out a new administration on this note,” Richard Ben-Veniste, a prominent Democratic lawyer in Washington, said in a telephone interview. “It would be mimicking the tin-pot dictators of historical disgrace who seek to punish those who have run against them.”
Her campaign said the seemingly positive outcome had only hurt it with voters who did not trust Mrs. Clinton and were receptive to Mr. Trump’s claims of a “rigged system.” In particular, white suburban women who had been on the fence were reminded of the email imbroglio and broke decidedly in Mr. Trump’s favor, aides said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After leading in polls in many battleground states, Mrs. Clinton told the donors on Saturday, “we dropped, and we had to keep really pushing to regain our advantage, which going into last weekend we had.”  “We were once again up in all but two of the battleground states, and we were up considerably in some that we ended up losing,” Mrs. Clinton said. “And we were feeling like we had to put it back together.”  Presidential candidates have a long history of blaming forces outside their control for their losses. In 2004, John Kerry linked his defeat to a videotape of Osama bin Laden that appeared days before the election, stoking fears about terrorism. In 2012, Mitt Romney told donors he had lost because President Obama had vowed to bestow “gifts” on Democratic special interests groups, namely African-Americans, Hispanics and young people.  Mrs. Clinton’s contention appears to be more rooted in reality — and hard data. An internal campaign memo with polling data said that “there is no question that a week from Election Day, Secretary Clinton was poised for a historic win,” but that, in the end, “late-breaking developments in the race proved one hurdle too many for us to overcome.”  Mrs. Clinton lost narrowly in several battleground states, and by the time all ballots are counted, she appears poised to win the popular vote by more than two million votes.  Still, Mrs. Clinton’s instinct to shun any personal responsibility angered some Democrats. Several donors on the call, while deeply bitter about Mr. Comey’s actions, said they believed that Mrs. Clinton and her campaign had suffered avoidable missteps that handed the election to an unacceptable opponent. They pointed to the campaign’s lack of a compelling message for white working-class voters and to decisions years ago by Mrs. Clinton to use a private email address at the State Department and to accept millions of dollars for speeches to Wall Street.  “There is a special place in hell for Clinton staff, allegedly including Cheryl Mills, that okayed the email server setup,” Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist and former senior aide to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, wrote on Sidewire, a social media site, referring to a longtime aide and lawyer to Mrs. Clinton.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign was so confident in her victory that her aides popped open Champagne on the campaign plane early Tuesday. But that conviction, aides would later learn, was based largely on erroneous data showing that young, black and Latino voters and suburban women who had been turned off by Mr. Trump’s comments but viewed Mrs. Clinton unfavorably would turn out for her in higher numbers than they ultimately did.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Exit polls conducted by Edison Research found that among people who said they had decided in the final week before Election Day, 47 percent voted for Mr. Trump and 42 percent for Mrs. Clinton.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As early as Wednesday morning, aides began to explain to Democrats shaken by the loss that the campaign’s sophisticated data modeling had not taken into account the bombshell F.B.I. announcement.  Mr. Comey’s letters to Congress went against the F.B.I.’s longstanding tradition of avoiding decisions that could affect elections, but he told aides that he felt he had no choice because he had already weighed in on the case so publicly. In July, he had taken the unusual step of publicly announcing that the F.B.I. would not charge Mrs. Clinton.  At the time, she believed she had finally put the issue to rest. And after the final debate on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, she emerged in such a strong position that she began to focus on campaigning for down-ballot Democrats and planned a campaign stop in traditionally Republican Arizona.  “We felt so good about where we were,” Mrs. Clinton told donors. Before Mr. Comey’s first letter to Congress, she added, “we just had a real wind at our back.”  Mr. Trump seized on the letter, telling voters in Nevada the Saturday before Election Day that “the F.B.I. has reopened its criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton,” and that the matter “would grind government to a halt” should Mrs. Clinton win the White House. The F.B.I.’s examination of the new emails did not in fact reopen the investigation.  Democratic pollsters attributed Mr. Trump’s laser-thin victories in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin — states that President Obama had won — largely to a drifting of college-educated suburban women to the Republican nominee at the last minute, because of the renewed focus on Mrs. Clinton’s email server.  “We lost with college-educated whites after leading with them all summer,” a Clinton spokesman, Brian Fallon, said on Wednesday. “Five more days of reminders about Comey, and they gravitated back to Trump.”  Before Mrs. Clinton spoke on Saturday, her finance director, Dennis Cheng, thanked the donors on the call, each of whom had raised at least $100,000. The campaign brought in nearly $1 billion to spend heavily on data efforts, to disperse hundreds of staff members to battleground states, and to air television advertisements — only to fall short to Mr. Trump’s upstart operation.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Donors conceded that, ultimately, no amount of money could match Mr. Trump’s crisp pitch, aimed at the economically downtrodden, to “make America great again.”  “You can have the greatest field program, and we did — he had nothing,” said Jay S. Jacobs, a prominent New York Democrat and donor to Mrs. Clinton. “You can have better ads, paid for by greater funds, and we did. Unfortunately, Trump had the winning argument.”  Mrs. Clinton has kept a low profile since her concession speech at a Midtown Manhattan hotel on Wednesday. On Thursday, a young mother with her 13-month-old daughter spotted Mrs. Clinton walking her dogs near her home in Chappaqua, N.Y., posting a photo of the defeated candidate on Facebook that quickly went viral along with the hashtag #ImStillWithHer.  On Friday night, Mrs. Clinton thanked volunteers on a nationwide conference call. “Look, I’m not going to sugarcoat it,” she said, sighing. “These have been very, very tough days.”
But Mr. Obama’s place in history looks considerably different than a week ago. The transformation he envisioned may not survive his administration. He is leaving near the peak of his popularity, yet many of the voters who made Mr. Obama the nation’s first black president chose to replace him with a man who had peddled racially incendiary suggestions that he might not have been born in this country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In some ways, this follows a pattern: Americans grow weary of incumbent presidents and often pick successors perceived to be the opposite. John F. Kennedy was the vigorous young antidote to the aging Dwight D. Eisenhower. The cerebral Mr. Obama was the antithesis of the bring-‘em-on George W. Bush.  “My operative theory of presidential succession is people always choose the remedy to what they have; they never choose the replica — even when the incumbent is popular,” said David Axelrod, Mr. Obama’s longtime strategist.  Given that, aides argued that Mr. Trump’s election should not be viewed as a referendum on the president. “It was not a rejection of Obama or Obama-ism,” said Dan Pfeiffer, another former senior adviser. “It was probably more about the two candidates running in this election.”  Critics said there was no way to look at it as anything but a rebuff. “The election outcome is a clear repudiation of President Obama, his policies, his vision, how those policies will be implemented,” said Eric Cantor, the former House Republican majority leader. “And frankly, I think it reflects the fact that most Americans think he failed.”  Photo  Jay Winik, a historian who has studied presidents of the Civil War and World War II eras, said Mr. Obama would be remembered for helping the country move further beyond the ugly legacy of slavery and racism. “That said, it is hard not to think, from a historian’s point of view, Trump’s election changes our perspective on President Obama and his impact on the country, knocking him down a few pegs,” he said. “A huge swath of American people were hurting, the so-called forgotten American, and President Obama failed them.”  Mr. Obama could take solace from the fact that most Americans approve of his handling of the job in polls and more Americans voted for Mrs. Clinton than Mr. Trump, despite the Electoral College. Aides even interpreted the results as a validation of sorts for Mr. Obama, because Mr. Trump stood as the candidate of change, just as he had, albeit change of a different sort.  Indeed, Mr. Trump’s election imperils many of Mr. Obama policies, notably the health care law that has extended coverage to 20 million Americans but aggravated others who resented government intrusion and rising premiums. Mr. Trump has promised to scrap Mr. Obama’s international climate change agreement and Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact, renegotiate his Iran nuclear deal, dismantle Dodd-Frank regulations on Wall Street and reverse orders sparing millions of illegal immigrants from deportation.  But bold campaign rhetoric does not always translate into such clear-cut action. For instance, Mr. Eisenhower denounced Harry S. Truman’s foreign policy, only to largely adopt it after taking over. Along similar lines, Richard M. Nixon did not scrap Lyndon B. Johnson’s Great Society, and Mr. Obama ultimately preserved much of Mr. Bush’s counterterrorism program.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama’s team hopes Mr. Trump finds it harder to shift course than he expected. Taking health care away from millions of Americans might prove problematic, Mr. Obama’s advisers said. In recent days, Mr. Trump has said he will keep elements of the program and find a way to ensure that Americans do not lose coverage.  Moreover, although Mr. Obama said that all of his progress would go “out the window,” advisers now argue the opposite: that many accomplishments cannot be overturned. He will be remembered, they said, for pulling the country out of the Great Recession, saving the auto industry, bringing home most troops fighting overseas, killing Osama bin Laden, enacting higher fuel efficiency standards and restoring relations with Cuba.  Still, after two midterm defeats, this was the third time since taking office that voters rejected Mr. Obama’s advice. He campaigned all out for Mrs. Clinton as no departing incumbent has in modern times, only to relearn the lesson that presidents cannot transfer popularity.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  And there is no getting around the fact that Mr. Trump’s America is not Mr. Obama’s. He has said one of his biggest disappointments was failing to heal the country’s divisions. Polarization now seems worse than before.  Mr. Obama accepts only so much responsibility for that, faulting Republican obstructionism. He points to his early days in office, when he was heading to Capitol Hill to discuss the economic crisis only to hear that Representative John A. Boehner, the top House Republican, had already rejected the new president’s stimulus package out of hand.  “When I think about the polarization that occurred in 2009 and 2010, I’ve gone back and I’ve looked at my proposals and my speeches and the steps we took to reach out to Congress,” he told the historian Doris Kearns Goodwin in a pre-election conversation published by Vanity Fair. “And the notion that we weren’t engaging Congress or that we were overly partisan or we didn’t schmooze enough, or we didn’t reach out enough to Republicans — that whole narrative just isn’t true.”  Photo  Instead, he has pointed to Republican radicalization. “I see a straight line from the announcement of Sarah Palin as the vice-presidential nominee to what we see today in Donald Trump, the emergence of the Freedom Caucus, the Tea Party and the shift in the center of gravity for the Republican Party,” he told Jonathan Chait of New York magazine this fall.  Republicans, unsurprisingly, reject that narrative. Mr. Cantor, then Mr. Boehner’s No. 2, cited a now-famous White House meeting in those early days. In it, Mr. Cantor suggested his own economic measures only to be dismissed. “Eric, elections have consequences and I won,” he recalled the president saying.  “That was really the tenor of Obama’s Washington,” Mr. Cantor said. “It was much different from what the people heard him say on the trail. It was never really the vision that people were led to believe.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Cantor himself embodied the risks for Republicans perceived to be cooperating with Mr. Obama when he was ousted in a 2014 primary for not being conservative enough.  Mr. Obama does not talk publicly about the role of race in the opposition to him, but it is cited by many of his supporters. Republican intransigence must be explained at least in part by race, they figure — a refusal to accept the legitimacy of the first African-American president.  Yet lock-step opposition to Mr. Obama can also be explained by other factors, including political calculation and authentic philosophical disagreement. Mr. Obama’s opponents contend that he cites race to explain away valid criticism. His more virulent foes maintain that Mr. Obama is the one who fueled racial division.  Either way, Mr. Obama did not fully see the emerging threat. He dismissed Mr. Trump as a carnival barker and, like many in Washington, did not understand that much of the country was alienated enough to embrace such a figure.  To the president, Mr. Trump was a source of deep irritation for the racially charged accusation that he was not actually born in America. At the White House Correspondents Association dinner in 2011, Mr. Obama took revenge on Mr. Trump, mocking him and his reality show. (“You fired Gary Busey. And these are the kinds of decisions that would keep me up at night.”)  In talks beforehand, aides recalled no debate about going after Mr. Trump. He was, Mr. Axelrod said, “low-hanging fruit” for Mr. Obama. “I guarantee you that as he delivered those jokes he did not think he was roasting his successor,” he said. “I don’t think that would have remotely crossed his mind.”  David Litt, a former speechwriter for Mr. Obama, remembered thinking that evening that Mr. Trump had been destroyed politically, rendered a laughingstock. “That’s the end of Donald Trump,” he said he thought. Now the laughingstock holds the fate of Mr. Obama’s legacy in his hands.  “I think President Obama will still go down in history as a great and historic president,” Mr. Litt said. “But a lot of his accomplishments are going to be limited by what happened on Tuesday. There’s no getting around that.”
The headline example is Wisconsin, where a Republican-backed law requiring voters to produce one of a limited number of acceptable photo IDs was in effect for the first time. Studies show — and some Republicans admit — that such laws disproportionately reduce Democratic turnout because many of the laws require IDs that low-income and immigrant voters, who are often Democrats, frequently lack.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Milwaukee, where turnout dropped 41,000 votes from the 2012 total, the chief elections official said on Friday that declines in voting were greatest in areas where lack of IDs was most common. Donald J. Trump won Wisconsin by about 27,000 votes.  No conclusion can be drawn on the impact of the ID requirement until voting data is analyzed, said Nicholas Stephanopoulos, a law professor at the University of Chicago and an election law expert. But “it’s at least a reasonable hypothesis that voting restrictions made a major difference in places like Wisconsin,” he said.  Others said they remained skeptical until election data could be sifted. Some of the strictest voter-identification laws that Republican legislatures had enacted were struck down by courts before balloting began, they noted, and support for Hillary Clinton declined across the board from 2012 levels, not just in states with stricter voter ID requirements.  “With their election debacle, Democrats are looking for a scapegoat,” said Richard L. Hasen, a law professor at the University of California, Irvine, and a leading election scholar. “And as much as I am upset with the efforts of Republican legislatures to make it harder to register and vote, I don’t think that’s the primary explanation for the Democrats’ failure at the top of the ticket.”  There is nevertheless broad agreement that the electoral system failed large numbers of would-be voters this year, and substantial doubt that many of those failings will be remedied anytime soon.  Detailed autopsies of Tuesday’s vote will not be available for weeks. But not counting the effects of politically driven voter suppression, experts believe about one million votes are not cast or are thrown out in an average presidential election through no fault of the voter, said Charles Stewart III, a political science professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Stewart is a member of the Caltech/M.I.T. Voting Technology Project, which researches election administration.  Some of those lost votes resulted from electronic or mechanical lapses that misread or lost ballots. But other factors are also at work. Estimates of the number of voters who were deterred by long lines and lengthy waits ranged as high as 730,000 in 2012, and a study by the Ohio State University and The Orlando Sentinel estimated that 200,000 people left lines in Florida alone that year.  Photo  Tuesday’s election brought long lines to a number of crucial states, including Ohio, North Carolina and Pennsylvania. Computer failures in Colorado, North Carolina and elsewhere caused delays in casting votes; in Durham, N.C., a breakdown of electronic voter registration rolls caused huge delays, witnesses said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  About 250,000 of the 26.8 million absentee ballots cast in 2012 were thrown out because voters failed to follow often arcane instructions on filling in and sealing their vote. One in six of the thrown-out votes that year was tossed because a ballot signature was deemed to not match those on registration documents, a flaw most experts attribute to mistakes or handwriting changes, not fraud.  Tuesday’s election likely saw a surge in provisional ballots — those cast but held in abeyance until their eligibility can be verified — as election-law changes in some states left voters and poll workers alike confused about requirements. Some of those ballots will not be counted because voters failed to follow up after the election to correct some deficiency, like the lack of a required ID card.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Voters see the outcome and think, ‘My vote won’t matter,’” said Barry C. Burden, the director of the Elections Research Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. “And even if the voter wants his vote to count, it’s still a hassle. You have to take another step that other voters don’t have to.”  Some of those shortcomings could be addressed before the next presidential balloting. After the 2012 election, a presidential task force recommended that states replace voting machines that were purchased after the disputed 2000 vote, which are nearing the end of their useful life.  One early test is whether Congress will allot money for that upgrade, a task that is far down the list of priorities for cash-strapped states and localities. That could reduce both the number of lost and misread ballots and the long lines caused by equipment failures.  But the outlook for perhaps the most significant change — removing the political and bureaucratic obstacles that dilute the vote — is decidedly more mixed in the wake of this week’s Republican sweep of power.  Voting rights advocates persuaded federal appeals courts to strike down restrictive laws in North Carolina, Texas and elsewhere as violations of both the Constitution and what remains of the Voting Rights Act. Those suits are now headed to the Supreme Court, where they are far more likely to be struck down if Mr. Trump nominates a conservative justice to fill the seat left by Antonin Scalia.  Still, those who anticipate a rollback of voting rights protections may be mistaken, said Edward B. Foley, a law professor and director of the election law project at Ohio State University. In recent rulings, even conservative judges have drawn the line at voter ID requirements and other restrictions that were clearly discriminatory, he said, and new academic studies have done far more to document the effects of those restrictions than in the past.  “I don’t think the sky is going to completely fall on voting rights,” Professor Foley said. “My instinct is that the system is going to essentially protect voters from outright disenfranchisement.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  What many elections experts call the most important objective — making it easier to register to vote — has gained momentum as states have moved toward online registration. This year, Vermont, West Virginia, Connecticut and Alaska joined Oregon in approving automatic voter registration, in which residents are enrolled to vote whenever they interact with a government agency, unless they opt out.  But further expanding the rolls will be difficult, experts say, because registration has also become a partisan issue. Many Republicans are both ideologically and politically against a change that not only removes patriotic impetus to sign up to vote, but that they believe will help expand the Democratic base more than their own.  Are they right?  “I don’t know,” Professor Hasen said. “But it certainly helps voters.”
The result was overwhelming support for Mr. Trump that polls utterly failed to predict, lifting turnout among Republican voters and even turning some reliably blue counties red. Stark County, a former manufacturing center south of Cleveland where voters have chosen Democrats in the past three presidential elections, was one of more than 215 that flipped to Mr. Trump.  Photo  “His points really hit home for us,” said Jacob Hawk, 23, an electrician from Minerva, Ohio, who voted for Mr. Obama in 2012. “A huge portion of it was just bringing jobs back to Ohio.”  In many ways, the vote here was just as much a rebellion against Mrs. Clinton as a choice made for Mr. Trump. Some say they saw her as the queen of a political dynasty whose reputation was tarnished in the 1990s. Her message felt flat and uninspiring. Perhaps most damaging, she was tainted by 1990s trade deals associated with her husband, former President Bill Clinton, that cost the Midwest, and Ohio in particular, many jobs, a point Mr. Trump hammered away at.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Our guys bring that up to this day,” said Tim McCort, the director of a training center for electricians and a union member. “That was devastating to this area.”  He added: “They didn’t like Hillary. She just didn’t come off as being honest.”  Polls got wrong something that residents in swing states plainly saw: Enthusiasm for Mr. Trump was boundless, while the feeling for Mrs. Clinton, outside of a handful of liberal strongholds, was like a body on life support. John McCall, 70, a lawyer who drove from his daughter’s house in Philadelphia to his home in Canton, Ohio, said he was surprised by the difference in yard signs.  “We were amazed,” Mr. McCall, who voted for Mr. Trump, said as he ate lunch at Athens Restaurant in Canton. “Once you got to the middle of Pennsylvania, it was Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump. But where were her signs? There was just a complete lack. It was the same in Ohio.”  He added, “When we got home, I told my wife that this election is a complete lock.”  The numbers in Stark County tell the tale. In the 2012 presidential election, there were about 79,000 registered Democrats, compared with about 63,000 registered Republicans, according to the county’s Board of Elections. In this election, the number of Democrats had fallen to about 42,500, while the number of Republicans had risen to more than 72,400. (Unaffiliated registrations also rose, and some said Democrats were changing parties to block Mr. Trump in the primary race.) Ultimately, Mr. Trump took 56 percent of the county’s vote, to Mrs. Clinton’s 39 percent.  Photo  “People are starting to say, ‘Hey, I think we’ve had enough,’” said Mr. Noble, who estimated that about half of his colleagues in the union also voted for Mr. Trump. “You’ve promised us so many things,” he said, referring to the Democratic Party, “and you don’t deliver. Show us how you are going to help us.”  Michael Hanke, a former editor of The Repository, a local newspaper, said support for Mr. Trump grew out of a deep vein of despair stretching back to the 1980s, when wages began to stagnate and factory jobs started going away. Young people left for college and never came back. Drugs arrived. Families fell apart.  It did not help that their problems were barely noticed by the news media or Washington policy makers. (Opioids have been devastating towns in Ohio since at least the 1990s, but wider attention to the problem has come only recently.)  “People feel despair when they hear that the economy is getting better but their own personal economy is not,” Mr. Hanke said. He added that as journalists became more educated, they also became less connected to the broader community. “Locally, I’m not so sure we caught it, either. Even though we were here.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the election here was about more than just a rejection of Mrs. Clinton. It was also an affirmation of Mr. Trump and his message. It caused a strange new split in the voting patterns of the electrical workers local. Most union leaders voted, as they always do, for the Democrat, Mrs. Clinton. But many rank-and-file electricians did not.  Mr. Hawk, the young electrician, said he voted for Mr. Trump because his economic program spoke to him in ways that Mrs. Clinton’s did not.  Photo  “I can’t say I would have been extremely upset if she had won,” he said while at a night class at a job training center, where he is studying to boost his credentials. “I wouldn’t have seen it like the country’s going to end if she became president. I was just pro what he was selling more than what she was selling.”  Mr. McCort, the training center director, is skeptical that any president has the power to unleash a flood of jobs, and worries that Mr. Trump, instead of stamping out moneyed interests in Washington, will be ushering in an era of new ones.  “You know darn well he’s going to be shooting from the business side of the fence,” Mr. McCort said. Still, he added: “One day at a time. I’ve got to trust that our country is a good place and it’s going to be O.K.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As for the Democratic Party, he said, “They really have some soul-searching to do in Ohio.”  Mr. Hawk believes Mr. Trump will deliver the essence of what he has promised.  “Do I think he’s going to accomplish building a wall? No. Do I think there will be some reforms of how immigration works and protection of the borders? Yes. And that would be nice.”  Mr. Hawk has been too busy to watch television, working a full-time job and taking night classes, so he has missed most of the scenes of the anti-Trump protests across the country. But he has been turned off by the constant talk of racism. Mr. Hawk cast the first vote of his life for Mr. Obama because, he said, “I liked his demeanor. The way he inspired people to be better.”  Photo  “They tried really hard to sell the whole racism thing,” he said. “Anytime you turned on the TV or were listening to the radio, it was always there.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Residents of swing counties like Stark are far less likely to be bubbles of like-minded people. But lately, that has been causing some stress. Disagreements over the election have ruined Thanksgiving plans, and even sundered some friendships. Some are in mourning. Fred Haymond, 70, roasted a turkey, “comfort food,” he said, and invited over his adult children.  “My country, as I remember it, would not have voted for this man,” he said.  At 12:47 a.m., on the night of the election, Bill Theiss, 70, a wine merchant from Canton and an enthusiastic supporter of Mr. Trump, got a text message from his daughter, who is 37 and lives in Hawaii.  “I am disgusted,” she wrote.  He sent one back: “You know what your father thinks.”  She replied with a long rant, full of angry words about fears for her daughter.  “I knew she had some feelings, I just didn’t know how deep,” Mr. Theiss said. “It was tough. It was very hard for me to read.”  He has not written back yet.
“I think everybody in Washington needs a kick in the rear,” Ms. Meadows, 68, said on Thursday as she ate fried fish at a diner in Warren, a weathered city at the county’s southern end. “And I think Washington needs to be done with the Clintons.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  She added, however, that she hoped Mr. Trump would not “do away with the health care” — Mr. Obama’s Affordable Care Act — as he had promised on the campaign trail. Her daughter had obtained subsidized insurance coverage through the law for $50 a month.  “I think he was bluffing,” Ms. Meadows said with a frown.  Mayor James R. Fouts of Warren said Trump supporters here were especially motivated by Mr. Trump’s promise to overturn or overhaul the North American Free Trade Agreement, which they blame for the loss of American manufacturing jobs to Mexico. All year, Mr. Trump has attacked Ford Motor Company in particular for planning to move all of its small car production to Mexico.  Photo  Noting that Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont also criticized free trade agreements when he ran against Mrs. Clinton in the Democratic primary race, Mr. Fouts said that some who normally vote Democrat in Macomb County had initially supported Mr. Sanders and migrated to Mr. Trump only after Mrs. Clinton became the Democratic nominee.  “There were a significant number of Sanders people who made the transition to Trump,” said Mr. Fouts, whose office is nonpartisan. “Bernie might have won here; Joe Biden might have won. But Hillary was never going to be the candidate to convince people around here that she was going to make a difference in their lives.”  Mr. Fouts voted for Mr. Obama twice. But this time he rejected both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump for a third-party candidate — which one, he would not say.  The last time the county backed a Republican presidential candidate was in 2004.  Mr. Trump may also have energized a segment of Macomb County voters who had not bothered to participate in the 2012 election. Voter turnout in the county was 4 percent higher this year, according to preliminary results, with 67 percent of registered voters casting ballots. On the other hand, some of the state’s most heavily Democratic counties, including Wayne, home to Detroit, and Genesee, home to Flint, saw less turnout than four years ago.  Photo  Amanda Rogers, a bartender in Warren, sat out the 2012 election but hustled to the polls to vote for Mr. Trump. Her boyfriend and her brother voted for the first time in their lives, she said. Ms. Rogers, 34, was motivated in part by what she saw as Mrs. Clinton’s lenient stance on immigration.  “We are drowning right now,” she said. “Our vets are homeless. There’s one out of every five American children starving right now. And Clinton wants to open the floodgates and let everybody else in.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Rogers, who said she had “loved Bill Clinton as a president” and found Mr. Obama “all right,” added: “There’s people who’ve been here 12 years who don’t even care to learn the language but want to reap all the benefits of this country: food stamps, free health care, Section 8 housing, welfare checks. People are sick of that, especially in Macomb County.”  Muslims from places like Yemen and Bangladesh are the most visible immigrants here. Just south of Macomb County is Hamtramck, which in one generation went from overwhelmingly Polish Catholic to majority Muslim. In Macomb, the City of Sterling Heights, home to a large Ford plant, is facing a federal lawsuit after rejecting a proposed mosque last year.  Photo  Mr. Trump held a rally last Sunday in Sterling Heights, where he elicited boos against Mrs. Clinton when he said she wanted “virtually unlimited immigration from the most dangerous regions of the world,” and would “import generations of terrorism, extremism and radicalism into your schools and your communities.”  Macomb County, though still largely white, is becoming more diverse: 82.3 percent of its 865,000 residents were white in 2015, according to the Census Bureau, down from 85.4 percent in 2010. The black population grew to 11.4 percent, from 8.6 percent. About 10 percent of the population is foreign born.  Many here also complain that poverty and crime are growing. As Macomb helped assure Mr. Trump’s victory on Election Day, it also played a major role in the defeat of a local ballot initiative that would have taxed its residents, and those of four neighboring counties, to build a public transportation system connecting Detroit and its suburbs.  Jason Powrozek, 18, a high school senior from New Baltimore, on the more affluent north side of the county, said he had voted against the transportation measure because “I just felt it would speed up the transport of drugs up here from the inner city.” A first-time voter, he had volunteered for at the county Republican headquarters and went to New York for the Trump campaign’s election night party.  “He tells it like it is,” Jason said of Mr. Trump. “He speaks what people don’t want to say because it’s politically incorrect.”  Mr. Trump also spoke on Halloween at Macomb Community College.  Frank Pitcher, 49, who lives in Sterling Heights and has worked at its Ford plant for 23 years, went to the Trump rally there and said he was surprised at how many of his co-workers he saw.  “I took some pictures with people there and posted on my Facebook because I wasn’t going to hide how I was voting,” he said. “I’m not ashamed of where I stand.”
Election night maps of Pennsylvania for decades included a bright blue crescent in the upper left corner. It was Erie County, a Democratic stronghold with an industrial economy that President Obama won by 16 percentage points in 2012. But Mr. Trump flipped the county, winning by two points as he carried Pennsylvania, one of the Rust Belt dominoes whose white working-class voters came out in droves for him.  Photo  “My views have realigned,” said Chris Trott, 26, a small-business owner who voted for Mr. Obama four years ago, but for Mr. Trump this time. “The world has changed a lot.”  Mr. Trott was having breakfast at Dominick’s 24-Hour Eatery (“Home of the meatball omelette”) on 12th Street, once Erie’s corridor of industrial plants, most of them now mothballed. The front page of The Erie Times-News in the box out front proclaimed “A New Reality.”  The population of the city of Erie recently slid below 100,000 for the first time in nearly a century. About 10 percent of its residents are refugees, resettled with the help of local agencies and injecting new blood as the economy shifts from industry to small businesses. Still, after General Electric laid off 1,500 people this year, anxiety spiked along with the jump in unemployment, which rose to 6.4 percent from 4.5 percent.  In August, more than 10,000 people filled the Erie Insurance Arena to hear Mr. Trump hammer the twin themes he effectively drove all year: that trade deals have hollowed out the United States’ industrial core, and that undocumented immigrants and refugees threaten the nation’s safety.  Democrats here lost the messaging war about jobs; about Mr. Obama’s achievements, including the Affordable Care Act, which covers 600,000 Pennsylvanians; and, especially, about Hillary Clinton’s trustworthiness and her connection to the working-class Americans President Bill Clinton once viscerally inspired.  “Erie has historically loved the Clintons,” said State Representative Ryan A. Bizzarro, a Democrat who won re-election from a suburban district in the county.  Photo  He was shocked by what he heard knocking on doors while campaigning this year.  “Every door I’d go to they’d say, ‘I don’t like Donald Trump, but I don’t like Hillary,’” said Mr. Bizzarro, 30, a scion of a local family that owns car dealerships and includes the retired prizefighter Lou Bizzarro, who once fought Roberto Duran.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “These were Democrats I was trying to get to support her,” he said. “They said they didn’t like her, and one of the main reasons was they felt she was not truthful. The Trump campaign effectively was able to make an issue of her supposedly being dishonest.”  The fierceness of the contest here stunned people, as an old order crumbled amid angry outbursts. Signs for both Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton were repeatedly vandalized. One Trump sign on West 38th Street was wrapped in barbed-wire coils.  Lou Aliota said a large Trump/Pence sign that he erected in his yard was hit with a paintball gun and with eggs. He replaced it with a sign 15 feet high.  “I am ecstatic right now,” Mr. Aliota, a retired pharmacist and school board member, said on Thursday. “In the next four years, you’re going to see an America that is strong. That is going be a beautiful thing.”  On another neighborhood street, a driver swerved onto the front lawn of the home of Betty and Gerald Hoffman to mow down their Clinton sign.  Photo  “I’m scared to death of Trump,” Ms. Hoffman said, coming to the door from watching C-SPAN, on which she said a woman was in tears over potentially losing her coverage if the health care law is repealed.  Ms. Hoffman fears that a more conservative Supreme Court will overturn Roe v. Wade. In the 1960s, she said, she was hospitalized when one of the twin fetuses she was carrying died in utero. She was told she would not live if the other were not aborted, but the Catholic hospital in which she was bedridden for 11 days refused. Her husband was told to call their three children to her bedside to say goodbye, but a doctor eventually performed the abortion, saving her life, she said. “I think a woman should control her own body,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump energized plenty of hard-core supporters in Erie County. But others who voted for him said they did not much like him and had cast their votes reluctantly. Their ambivalence suggests they could turn against Mr. Trump if he does not deliver quickly on his promises.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “I agonized over this decision,” said Mark Miller, 53, who voted for Mr. Trump but faulted the president-elect’s “inability to think before he speaks.”  He parted ways with Mr. Trump over his call to bar refugees and deport undocumented immigrants en masse. “I’d like to see these people integrated into the system,” said Mr. Miller, who owns a John Deere dealership. “A lot of them are good, hard-working people.” They live in Erie’s old residential blocks of modest bungalow-style homes, and they buy chain saws and lawn mowers from Mr. Miller.  Local officials said Mr. Trump’s dire warnings about refugees during his visit here (“Take a look at what’s happening,” the candidate said) hit a nerve in rural parts of the county where voters, mostly white, have less exposure to the newcomers from Nepal, Bhutan, Bosnia and, yes, Iraq and Syria.  Photo  In the borough of Wesleyville, nearby the enormous General Electric locomotive plant, Jennie and Jack Chilcott, retirees, were sharing a booth at Russ’ Dinor, a homey eatery that adopts the local spelling of “diner.” Both are Democrats who voted for Mr. Obama four years ago.  “I voted for Trump because I didn’t like the Democrat,” said Ms. Chilcott, who retired from General Electric after 40 years. “The lies. Benghazi. The email. I just waited for her to get up there and justify everything, and she just beat around the bush about it.”  Mr. Chilcott told his wife: “She actually did apologize. I still think she thought she was above the law.”  Mr. Chilcott, who wore an Army veteran’s cap, chose Mr. Trump “for a change,” he said.  “That’s why I voted for Obama,” he said. “I thought he was going to do something. He didn’t do anything.”  Mr. Chilcott was laid off after 32 years when Erie City Iron Works shut its doors in 1995, one of numerous plant closings that had more to do with the city’s aging, inefficient industry than global trade deals.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I was 49 and had to start all over again,” he said. “I worked for half the wages and no vacation.”  He said he was “shocked” that Mr. Trump won. He attributes it to blue-collar voters like himself, working and retired, who fear for their economic security.  But he echoed the caveat a number of Republican officials uttered this year about Mr. Trump, suggesting his support from Democrats in traditional blue counties is provisional.  “We didn’t support him,” Mr. Chilcott said. “We did vote for him.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Obama administration is negotiating with Malaysia over a deal to repatriate and continue to incarcerate a Guantánamo Bay detainee accused of being an accessory to two major terrorist attacks in Indonesia, officials said.  While challenges remain, the prospective deal is important because it could set up a way to prosecute the detainee and two others, including an Indonesian man best known as Hambali, who is accused of masterminding the two attacks. They are among the 30 men who have been held in indefinite wartime detention without charges for over a decade and who are still deemed too dangerous to release.  The high-level talks also have broader importance for the future of the United States’ security cooperation and relationship with Malaysia. They are being held amid tensions over China’s efforts to assert greater control over the South China Sea and over a scandal involving Malaysia’s prime minister, whom the Justice Department recently accused in a civil complaint of playing a role in a billion-dollar corruption scheme.  Early this month, the State and Defense Department envoys for closing Guantánamo, Lee Wolosky and Paul Lewis, and the chief prosecutor of the military commissions system, Brig. Gen. Mark Martins, flew to Malaysia. They met on Nov. 2 with the Malaysian deputy prime minister and other top Malaysian officials to discuss the potential deal, officials said.  The talks center on a Malaysian detainee at Guantánamo, Mohd Farik Bin Amin, better known as Zubair. Along with another Malaysian detainee, Mohammed Nazir Bin Lep, who is often called Lillie, Mr. Zubair is accused of helping Mr. Hambali evade arrest after the 2002 nightclub bombings in Bali and of moving funds later used to finance the 2003 Marriott Hotel bombing in Jakarta. (Mr. Hambali is also named Riduan Isamuddin.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The idea is that Mr. Zubair would plead guilty to terrorism offenses before an American military commission and agree to testify against Mr. Lillie and Mr. Hambali. If he lives up to that promise and serves about four more years in United States custody, Mr. Zubair would be repatriated to Malaysia to serve the remainder of his sentence.  The Obama administration declined to comment on the deliberations. The officials who described them spoke on the condition of anonymity because the deal is not public or final. Lawyers for Mr. Hambali and Mr. Lillie said they had heard rumors of movement but had no details.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Last year, Mr. Zubair had been close to agreeing to a similar plea deal in the military commissions system, according to the officials and to his defense lawyer, Mark Denbeaux, who provided The New York Times with a copy of a charge sheet that prosecutors had drafted for those talks. But the deal collapsed after Malaysia’s attorney general at the time suggested that Malaysian law might not permit carrying out a sentence imposed by the tribunal, they said.  There is a new attorney general in Malaysia, and there appears to be greater high-level political will for Malaysia to take back its two nationals at Guantánamo.  The talks have also explored whether Mr. Zubair might plead guilty both to military commission charges and — via videoconference link from Cuba — to domestic criminal offenses in Malaysia, potentially bolstering Malaysia’s domestic legal authority to keep imprisoning him after a transfer.  The Malaysian government wants to get back Mr. Lillie as well, and the American government wants to convict him — either through a plea or by trial with help from Mr. Zubair’s testimony. But its ultimate goal is to use testimony from one or both of them to win a conviction against Mr. Hambali. The Bali bombings killed 202 people, including seven Americans; the Jakarta bombing killed at least 11 people and wounded about 140 more.  Mr. Denbeaux said he had not yet discussed any new plea deal with Mr. Zubair. But he cautioned that while his client wanted to go home, their hope during the talks last year was that Malaysian courts might grant him some credit for the 13 years he has spent in custody, despite rules in the military commissions system that bar crediting time served toward a sentence.  “I can’t say whether he’d take a deal,” Mr. Denbeaux said. “He wants to go back. It’s just a question of what the terms are. He doesn’t want Malaysia to become Guantánamo 2.0.”
“It is unprecedented in modern history to have the level of complexity of global substantial business relationships that the president-elect has, and the litigation that inevitably follows any complex global business venture,” said Norman L. Eisen, a former special counsel for ethics and government reform under President Obama, who supported Mr. Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton. “It will be complicated, but not insurmountable.”  Photo  Mr. Trump faces potential conflicts on multiple fronts. He has income streams that could be affected by taxation policies he may try to get through Congress. His companies have hundreds of millions of dollars of debt from banks regulated by the federal government. In one case, Mr. Trump is a part owner of an office building in Manhattan that carries a $950 million loan from lenders that include the Bank of China.  A key source of his revenue is the licensing of the Trump name, both domestically and abroad, and the value of that brand could be helped, or harmed, by actions he takes or does not take.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Trump Organization said it had begun the process of “vetting various structures,” with a goal of quickly transferring the businesses to three of Mr. Trump’s children — Donald Jr., Ivanka and Eric — along with executives. “This is a top priority at the Organization and the structure that is ultimately selected will comply with all applicable rules and regulations,” Amanda Miller, a marketing executive for the company, wrote in an email.  During a debate in January, Mr. Trump said he would put his holdings in a blind trust, an arrangement in which a public official lets a financial manager control his wealth and does not know exactly how the money is invested. But in the next breath, he acknowledged the problem with that strategy: “Well, I don’t know if it’s a blind trust if Ivanka, Don and Eric run it.”  In an interview, Alan Garten, a lawyer for the Trump Organization, spoke of the difficulty of the task. “There has been a huge event — a historic event — that has occurred,” he said. “There is no question that makes my job more complicated.”  Under federal laws, executive branch employees must comply with conflict-of-interest rules that guard against being influenced by personal investments, and they must curb payments from sources outside the government. As a result, employees may have to recuse themselves from working on matters where they may have conflicts, holding certain properties or accepting money. For example, when Henry Paulson, the former Goldman Sachs executive, became Treasury secretary in 2006, he pledged to sell about $470 million in company stock to comply with conflict-of-interest rules.  Photo  But the president and vice president were exempted from such laws, on the theory that they needed to be able to carry out their constitutional duties without restraint. So President Trump will be able to take actions pertaining to another country even if he has business interests there.  Federal laws like those against bribery and receiving benefits from foreign countries still apply to the president. Enforcement would fall to the Justice Department or to Congress, which could pursue criminal or impeachment proceedings if evidence suggests laws were broken.  Mr. Trump will be required next year to file an updated personal financial disclosure listing his holdings, similar to the forms he has filed the past couple of years as a candidate. But Mr. Trump will not be required to make public his income tax returns, which he declined to do during the campaign, citing a continuing audit by the Internal Revenue Service, an agency he will now control. If he did release them, the tax returns could provide transparency into his international business dealings and other potential conflicts that may arise.  As president, Mr. Trump will have no protection from lawsuits related to his life outside the White House, a result of the 1997 Supreme Court ruling that President Clinton could be sued by Ms. Jones in a sexual harassment case that dated to his time as Arkansas’s governor. That litigation, which ended in an $850,000 settlement but no admission of wrongdoing, preoccupied Mr. Clinton in his second term and indirectly led to his impeachment.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  That ruling could set a trap for Mr. Trump — who has been accused by several women of unwanted advances, though none are currently suing him — and present a strategy for his political opponents to hamper his administration with litigation, legal experts said.  “I anticipate that is going to be one of the first line of attacks against President Trump,” said Richard W. Painter, the chief White House ethics lawyer under President George W. Bush from 2005 to 2007, who endorsed Mrs. Clinton. “It is potentially very destructive for the country as it was with Clinton.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  On Thursday, as Mr. Trump was in Washington meeting with President Obama and congressional leaders, his lawyers were in court in San Diego for a lengthy hearing related to the Trump University lawsuit, in which former students allege they were cheated out of thousands of dollars in tuition through deceptive promises and high-pressure sales tactics.  Mr. Trump has rejected the allegations. But on Thursday, one of his lawyers, Daniel Petrocelli, told the judge, Gonzalo P. Curiel — whom Mr. Trump accused of bias because of his Mexican heritage — that he was open to discussing a settlement in the case.  Mr. Petrocelli also said he might request to delay the trial to next year, saying more time was necessary because “we’re in uncharted territories” in light of Mr. Trump’s election, The Associated Press reported. Trump University is also the subject of a lawsuit by the New York attorney general. That case will also continue.  Mr. Trump and his businesses are enmeshed in myriad other litigation. Mr. Trump has been engaged in a lengthy dispute with Palm Beach County over jetliners flying over his Mar-a-Lago resort on the way to and from the nearby airport. In a lawsuit, he claimed that the noise, vibrations and emissions from the aircraft are disruptive to guests and damaging the property, including the Dorian stone and antique Cuban roof tiles.  And in Washington, Mr. Trump has sued two celebrity chefs, Geoffrey Zakarian and José Andrés, after they backed out of restaurant deals at his new hotel development at the Old Post Office Pavilion after he made incendiary comments last year about Mexican immigrants.  The Old Post Office project itself is a potential conflict. The Trump Organization signed a 60-year deal with the federal government to redevelop and manage the building as a hotel — meaning that he will be, in a sense, his own landlord.
Photo  President-elect Donald J. Trump won the White House with an outsider’s populist promise to “drain the swamp” of Washington.  Now, as he prepares to assume the presidency, an open question remains about the capital he repeatedly spurned: Just how much is he willing to become a part of it?  Mr. Trump, a homebody who often flew several hours late at night during the campaign so he could wake up in his own bed in Trump Tower, is talking with his advisers about how many nights a week he will spend in the White House. He has told them he would like to do what he is used to, which is spending time in New York when he can.  The future first lady, Melania Trump, expects to move to Washington. But the couple’s 10-year-old son, Barron, is midway through a school year in New York, and it is unclear when the move would happen.  The questions reflect what Mr. Trump’s advisers described as the president-elect’s coming to grips with the fact that his life is about to change radically. They say that Mr. Trump, who was shocked when he won the election, might spend most of the week in Washington, much like members of Congress, and return to Trump Tower or his golf course in Bedminster, N.J., or his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach on weekends.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Hanging on to the familiar for presidents-elect and their families is not unusual. There were early questions about whether Michelle Obama would leave Chicago and move to the White House in early 2009 and disrupt her daughters’ school years, but the whole family moved in the day of the inaugural. Mr. Trump’s advisers hold out the possibility that the president-elect may spend more time in the White House as he grows less overwhelmed and more comfortable in the job.  Still, Mr. Trump has spent the last three decades, for the most part, cosseted within Trump Tower. His apartment is on the 58th floor, and a designated elevator takes him from there to his office on the 26th floor.  He wakes at 5 o’clock most mornings, reads The New York Post, The New York Times and a handful of other newspapers, and tunes into the morning television news shows. In the final months of the campaign, he would hang around his apartment until about 10 a.m., joining his aides in the office later.  Mr. Trump’s affection for his penthouse apartment runs deep, as his biographer, Michael D’Antonio, learned when Mr. Trump invited him inside the three-story unit in 2014 for an extended interview.  Photo  Mr. Trump reveled in recalling the challenges required to design and build the apartment, decorated in 24-karat gold and marble in the Louis XIV style, saying he simply wanted to see if such an ambitious undertaking could be accomplished. He described it less as a home than a tribute to his own self-image.  “I really wanted to see if it could be done,” Mr. Trump said at the time, as he showed Mr. D’Antonio around the apartment. “This is a very complex unit. Building this unit, if you look at the columns and the carvings, this building, this unit was harder than building the building itself.”  Yet after meeting with President Obama on Thursday and touring the White House, Mr. Trump, according to two people briefed on his thinking, was taken with that building over all and marveled at the neoclassical architecture and history.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Returning home to Trump Tower from the White House may not be Mr. Trump’s only embrace of the familiar. His aides say he has also expressed interest in continuing to hold the large rallies that were a staple of his candidacy. He likes the instant gratification and adulation that the cheering crowds provide, and his aides are discussing how they might accommodate his demand.  “I think Trump has discovered that these rallies are tremendous opportunities for him to get his message out,” said Christopher Ruddy, chief executive of Newsmax Media, a conservative website. “It’s actually sort of old-fashioned, that you want to actually meet people and press the flesh with him.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Not least, Mr. Trump is finding Twitter a familiar comfort, although it is unclear if he will be the first president to wholly control his own Twitter account once he is in the White House. “I know they’re willing to be unorthodox and want to be true to themselves and not fall into a habit of let’s just follow precedent on what’s been done,” said Mike DuHaime, an adviser to Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who supported Mr. Trump shortly after ending his own White House bid and who stepped back as the head of the president-elect’s transition team on Friday.  Mr. Trump’s aides got him to agree to restrict his use of Twitter in the waning days of his campaign, but on Thursday, his second day as president-elect, Mr. Trump posted the kind of Twitter missive for which he has become known: a message complaining that “professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting.”  “Very unfair!” he wrote.  Mr. Trump checked himself later when he offered a more unifying message: “Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country. We will all come together and be proud.”  For now Mr. Trump remains in Trump Tower receiving congratulations, thanking those who stayed with him and venting to associates his lingering grievances with the news media over coverage of the campaign. He has stayed in touch with reporters at Fox News, checking in to ask about ratings and, as he has done for months, polling people about whom he should put in top jobs.  One constant is that the small cadre of aides and advisers who signed on with the campaign in its early, long-shot days will probably have jobs in the administration, should they want them. They have been told that all of the campaign staff will be taken care of.  “It was such a small operation and it’s such a big government, so it’s very natural they’re going to look to the people who went with them early and stuck with them through thick and thin,” Mr. DuHaime said.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Vice President-elect Mike Pence made his name as a relentless conservative critic of the federal government. Soon he will essentially be running it.  Given the dearth of hands-on Washington experience in the inner circle of President-elect Donald J. Trump, Mr. Pence, a former Republican congressman, is emerging as a commanding figure in the administration taking shape as well as the chief conduit between Capitol Hill and the White House.  “My guess is he will be one of the most involved, day-to-day, managerial vice presidents in the history of the republic,” said Representative Jeb Hensarling, a senior Republican from Texas and a close ally from Mr. Pence’s days on Capitol Hill.  The announcement on Friday that Mr. Pence, who served 12 years in the House after his election in 2000, would be taking over management of the transition from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey was just more reassurance for top congressional Republicans who intend to rely heavily on him as their point man at the Trump White House. His selection as Mr. Trump’s running mate this summer calmed congressional Republicans jittery about the Trump candidacy.  Comparisons with Dick Cheney, considered a uniquely powerful No. 2 when he served with President George W. Bush, are already being made.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, said he had encouraged Mr. Pence to attend weekly party lunches in the Capitol just as Mr. Cheney did.  “We all really like Mike Pence,” Mr. McConnell said. “If you’ve asked any of us who’ve served with him, everybody likes him.”  To Washington Republicans, Mr. Pence is one of them, someone who can speak the argot of Congress and knows a C.R. (continuing resolution) from a C.B.O. score (Congressional Budget Office cost estimate).  “Trump had the vision and the passion and he understood about the forgotten man and woman,” Mr. Hensarling said. “Mike is a guy who can take that vision and passion and turn it into policy and then turn that policy into legislative language and then turn that language into bills that can reach the president’s desk.”  Mr. Pence also called Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, this week, but the two former congressional colleagues did little beyond exchange pleasantries and agree to meet in the future.  To Democrats, it is more than a little worrisome that Mr. Pence, a strong Christian conservative on social as well as fiscal issues, will be playing such a central role in the new administration.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Mike Pence is one of the most ideologically rigid individuals I’ve served with,” said Representative Steve Israel, a senior Democrat from New York, who is retiring. “Trump is putting the extreme right wing at the center of gravity in his administration, and that should be worrying to mainstream voters.”  Mr. Pence came to Congress as a rebel willing to challenge the priorities of his own party’s leadership. He was part of the leading edge of Tea Party-style Republicans eager to shake up Washington, but landed in the party leadership before leaving to run for governor of Indiana, a post that has provided him with government executive experience that could also prove valuable in his new role.  In the House, he was among the leaders of the effort to ban earmarks — spending sought by lawmakers for their home districts, popular at the time — and he was a strong advocate for cutting government spending over all. He opposed the expansion of Medicare to include prescription drug coverage — then a major priority of his party and the Bush White House. He led the Republican Study Committee, then the most conservative House Republicans, and was beaten badly in his first leadership race — a campaign that Mr. Hensarling notes he managed — before being elected to the No. 3 post of Republican Conference chairman in 2008.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As governor, Mr. Pence also instituted aspects of the Affordable Care Act in his state and accepted federal money to do so — a departure from how many other Republican governors responded to the new law. That experience could give him added expertise as the Republican Congress moves to dismantle the health program that is a signature of the Obama era and a top target of Mr. Trump’s.  Mr. Pence could also serve as a handy buffer between Mr. Trump and Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who clashed with Mr. Trump during the campaign but in recent weeks has sought to minimize any differences. In remarks after the election, Mr. Ryan has gone out of his way to note his close relationship and frequent contact with Mr. Pence.  “Mike Pence is a good man, a principled conservative, and he will make a great vice president,” Mr. Ryan told reporters this week.  Delegating significant authority to Mr. Pence jibes with Mr. Trump’s image as more of a chairman-of-the-board figure who leaves the details to others — and in Washington, there are a lot of details.  But Mr. Pence’s friends do not expect to him to push his role beyond what is expected, and they say he remains very deferential to Mr. Trump.  “Mike knows he was elected vice president, not president,” Mr. Hensarling said. “He knows who the boss is. Trump’s the boss.”  But in Washington, Mr. Pence is quickly coming to be seen as a highly empowered No. 2.
There has been weeping at West Wing staff meetings and a series of presidential pep talks, a tear-jerker of a Rose Garden gathering and anguished conversations about what will happen to President Obama’s legacy and the job prospects of his aides.  Since Donald J. Trump shocked both political parties and won the presidential election on Tuesday, a White House that had expected to spend the week celebrating a historic victory that would cement Mr. Obama’s most cherished initiatives for years to come is instead experiencing the seven stages of grief.  “It started with sadness and disbelief and definitely some tears around the building,” said one senior official who spoke on the condition of anonymity, unwilling to be quoted by name in detailing the crying or dwelling on the sense of loss hanging over the West Wing.  “Now it’s, ‘Let’s take a moment to digest,’ but also, ‘Let’s quickly pull ourselves up by our bootstraps because we need to continue to do our jobs,’” the official added.  A second senior official said she felt Hillary Clinton’s loss in her gut.  “I was actually physically ill for a while,” she said. “The only time I cried was when she came out and said, ‘I’m sorry,’” she added, referring to Mrs. Clinton’s concession speech on Wednesday in a hotel ballroom, when the candidate herself briefly teared up.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A cocktail party later that day for senior officials and cabinet members past and present felt “like sitting shiva,” one attendee said, referring to the weeklong Jewish mourning ritual in which friends and family grieve over a steady stream of refreshments.  Through it all, Mr. Obama has played the role of consoler in chief, pulling staff members into the Oval Office or dropping in on their meetings to buck them up, reassure them and tell them that this, too, shall pass.  Mr. Trump’s victory is a particularly bitter pill to swallow for the younger generation of aides in the White House, including many who had their first campaign experience as junior staff members on Mr. Obama’s improbable 2008 bid. They remember only one type of feeling the day after a presidential election: the euphoria of a history-making victory, coupled with a sense of invincibility from beating the odds.  This is the opposite of that.  In his private sympathy sessions, according to people who have attended, Mr. Obama has encouraged aides not to allow themselves to sink into despair.  “You don’t need hope when things are going well,” he tells them. “You need it when things are not going well.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The funereal air that hung over the White House in the first hours after Mr. Trump’s victory has given way to a more brave-faced solemnity, as Mr. Obama’s team turns its attention to ensuring a smooth transition to the next administration. His aides say they are determined not to appear bitter or petty at a moment when the president is trying to telegraph professionalism and grace.  But the truth is that they are all reeling, trying to process how they could have been so blindsided by Tuesday’s result, stung by the notion that the nation has just repudiated everything they have worked for, and wondering how different their lives will look from what they imagined a week ago.  “Everybody’s sort of recalibrating and regrouping,” said Kathleen Sebelius, the former secretary of health and human services, who attended Wednesday’s reception at the White House. Former officials flew to Washington from around the country to participate in what was supposed to be a celebration of Mrs. Clinton’s victory but felt more like a group therapy session, she said.  “It wasn’t quite a funeral — more like a memorial service,” she said. “It was a celebration of what we had done together, but with some ominous thoughts about what happens now.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama was upbeat, telling cabinet members how proud he was of the work they had done and the difference they had made for the good of the country.  “It was helpful to hear him talk about it and to share some time with one another,” Ms. Sebelius said. “We had a pretty amazing group of people who came to serve this president, and I think all of us felt good about that. Terrible about the election result, but good about that.”  Still, Mr. Obama’s efforts to accentuate the positive and the orderly passing of the baton are, in some sense, all the more jarring to members of his team who want nothing more than to hear him rail against Mr. Trump and all that he represents.  “Everyone who worked so hard on these issues is feeling an actual sense of loss and, because of the unexpected nature of this, like something was really yanked away from us,” said one former official who attended Wednesday’s party. “And now the president can’t be the voice for the Obama community at the time that it’s needed the most. It’s really disorienting.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — After his party’s brutal Election Day loss, Senator Chuck Schumer, the presumptive incoming Democratic minority leader, threw his support on Friday behind a liberal member of Congress to be the next chairman of the Democratic National Committee.  Mr. Schumer’s choice, Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota, is a favorite of the party’s left. Should he win the chairmanship, he would become one of the Democrats’ most visible spokesmen as the party seeks to regroup after losing the White House and an array of state-level offices to a populist wave fueled by white working-class voters.  The move signals the desire of Mr. Schumer to score early points with Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Bernie Sanders of Vermont, leaders from the party’s left. Mr. Schumer is likely to have to disappoint them at times in legislative battles after President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office as he seeks to protect endangered Democrats from Republican-leaning states who are up for re-election in 2018.  But Mr. Ellison, should he decide to run, will face some competition from Democrats who believe that the chairmanship should be a full-time job, not one that is split with the duties of being an elected official. Some Democrats also say they feel that the party should be run by someone who hails from an industrial state where the party has lost voters and support.  Others who are interested in the job include a former chairman, Howard Dean, a former governor of Vermont; Martin O’Malley, a former governor of Maryland; Raymond Buckley, the chairman of the New Hampshire Democratic Party; and Jaime R. Harrison, the chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “We have to do a better job of talking about not just equal rights for blacks and Latinos, but everybody,” Mr. Harrison said. “It doesn’t matter if you are a white person in West Virginia or a black person in South Carolina or New York City, we are fighting for each and every one of you.”  President Obama largely ignored the organization, charged with building the party’s foundation and electing Democrats to office, in favor of his own political group, Organizing for Action. The Democratic National Committee has been run since this summer by Donna Brazile after the previous leader, Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, stepped down after the leak of committee emails that portrayed her in an unflattering light.  “The infrastructure of the party is in shambles,” said Mo Elleithee, a Democratic strategist. “You need someone who is going to really roll up their sleeves and figure that piece out.”  Photo  Mr. Ellison, 53, has served in the House since 2007, representing greater Minneapolis. An African-American Muslim and the leader of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, he was an early supporter of Mr. Sanders and was among a relative handful of Democrats who took Mr. Trump’s prospects as a presidential candidate seriously from the beginning.  The central challenges for the next party chairman, Democrats say, include rebuilding the party’s ailing infrastructure and finding a way to excite voters. Of particular interest are those who backed Mr. Obama but did not support Hillary Clinton, and white working-class voters who have drifted to the Republicans.  “Without a Democratic White House, Schumer’s view is the D.N.C. is where grass-roots organizing in sync with legislative battles should be organized,” said Matt House, a spokesman for Mr. Schumer.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But Democrats may also find themselves in an ideological tangle that has knotted up both parties for the past several years. Progressives like Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren and Mr. Ellison could be at odds with more moderate Democrats, including a large number who face tough re-election fights in 2018 in the Senate.  “I really, really like Keith,” Ms. Warren said this week on MSNBC, speaking about Mr. Ellison. “And I think he’s terrific, and I think he would make a terrific D.N.C. chair.”  The chairman’s role is traditionally focused less on defining the party’s ideological stance than on fund-raising, providing the party with the technology and other tools it needs to be competitive and organizing at the grass-roots level.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The worst thing the party can do is have a big fight over whether the chairman should be a progressive or moderate,” Mr. Elleithee said. “We don’t live on that paradigm anymore, and this election proved it.”  Mr. O’Malley said he was considering seeking the job because “our party needs to rebuild.”  “We need to acknowledge that our message did not communicate credibly enough for a large number of Americans, and we need to do it urgently in a collaborative and inclusive way,” he said. “This is not what I expected to be doing. Given my background as well as my experience traveling the country, there are people who have called me and told me I should run.”  Mr. Dean, who has said he is “very interested” in the job, employed a so-called 50-state strategy when he was chairman in 2005, working to recruit in places Democrats have often failed to flourish. He said this week that his strategy ought to be employed again.
“Anybody who watches the news knows we need to have law and order reinstalled and we need to have more support for Blue Lives Matter,” she said, referring to the pro-police slogan that became a retort to the protests.  Photo  In recent interviews, other supporters of Mr. Trump have said they want him to institute curfews in city neighborhoods and to increase funding to drug treatment programs. They also expressed approval for widespread use of stop-and-frisk, the police practice of stopping and sometimes searching people in high-crime areas.  While supporters of the practice say it helps officers find illegal weapons and bring down homicide rates, it became a source of enormous tension between the police and black residents in the cities that deployed it. A federal judge in New York struck down the tactic as unconstitutional in 2013, saying the way the city was using it violated the rights of minorities. But if it were ever reinstated, it could one day land in front of a Supreme Court with Trump appointees who could be more open to its use.  “Donald Trump has proposed nothing short of a police state,” said Brittany Packnett, an activist who served on President Obama’s task force on 21st-century policing. “This is backlash to a black president, a black movement and black people being self-determined, bold and unapologetic.”  Mr. Trump’s ability to impose stop-and-frisk, should he follow through on his campaign talk, would be limited by the fact that local police and sheriff’s departments control most aspects of law enforcement. His administration could conceivably use grants to encourage local departments to adopt his policies, much in the way that President Bill Clinton’s Justice Department handed out money to encourage the hiring of tens of thousands of new officers around the country.  Mr. Trump’s Justice Department will have another pressing policy matter: how aggressively to pursue investigations against the police.  Under Mr. Obama, the department has often taken the lead on police violence cases, sometimes looking into prosecuting officers on charges of civil rights violations after local prosecutors declined to charge them or juries declined to convict. The department has in the last couple of years demanded changes from a number of police departments, including in Ferguson, Mo., where it found that officers were violating the constitutional rights of black residents, and in Cleveland, where it found a pattern of “unreasonable and unnecessary use of force” that resulted in dangerous and reckless behavior by officers. Both inquiries came after black residents were killed by local officers.  “What role does he see for his Justice Department in dealing with use-of-force issues, pattern and practice investigations, and the overall role of the Justice Department vis-à-vis local law enforcement?” Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, said of Mr. Trump. “We really don’t know yet.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  One of the first issues Mr. Trump’s Justice Department is likely to have to deal with is the case of Mr. Garner, whose dying words, “I can’t breathe,” became a nationwide rallying cry. In December 2014, a state grand jury in Staten Island decided not to bring charges against Officer Daniel Pantaleo, who was seen on a video using a chokehold, prohibited by the New York Police Department, to subdue Mr. Garner.  Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch recently replaced the New York team of federal agents and lawyers investigating the case, who were leaning against filing charges against the officers involved, a move that struck some as political.  On Tuesday night as defeat set in, Ms. Carr began writing a letter to Ms. Lynch pleading with her to quickly decide how to proceed before Mr. Trump takes office.  “Please hear my cry, don’t allow my son’s words and our tears to be in vain,” Ms. Carr wrote before sending it off Friday morning. “I’ve been living in a nightmare and crying for over two years and I’m ready to awake to peace.”  In an interview, Ms. Carr added that she felt new pressure to get the case resolved. “I know my son’s case is on the line, and if it goes past Obama’s administration, we are not going to get any justice,” she said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  William Bateman, 52, who voted for Mr. Trump and works as an operations manager in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, sees things differently. He felt that the Justice Department, under Mr. Obama’s direction, “politicized everything,” and that the president was unfair to the police by “blaming them before they went to trial.”  He also said he believed a constant theme of Mr. Obama’s tenure was a sentiment of exclusion, beginning when the president weighed in on the 2012 shooting death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin by a neighborhood watch volunteer in Sanford, Fla. “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon,” Mr. Obama said then.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It was like he was defending the black community, the Muslim community, the Hispanic community,” Mr. Bateman said this week. “But not the white community.”  The feeling that Mr. Obama was taking sides reverberated around the country and was part of the reason the National Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Mr. Trump, said Jim Pasco, its executive director. Many saw parallels between Mr. Trump’s law-and-order pledge and Richard M. Nixon’s 1968 campaign that became a reaction to the national strife over the Vietnam War, the Voting Rights Act, the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, and widespread rioting.  “The atmosphere has gotten harder for police officers because there is a lot of second-guessing by people with a lack of insight into their jobs and a lack of expertise on what constitutes appropriate policing techniques in given situations,” Mr. Pasco said, adding that officers hoped that Mr. Trump would change the nation’s view of policing.  But if the election of Mr. Trump was a counterprotest against Black Lives Matter, there were no signs that protest leaders planned to turn down the volume. Activists like Charlene Carruthers, the national director of Black Youth Project 100, said this week that they were reeling from Mr. Trump’s election and were preparing to strongly oppose his policies.  “We are now facing a presidential administration that not only does not value black people’s lives,” Ms. Carruthers said, “but will promote and support policies that will actively make our lives worse and kill more people.”
Mr. Christie will become a vice chairman of the transition effort, the campaign said.  The new inner circle at the transition offices will direct the activities of dozens of corporate consultants, lobbyists and other specialists who will be responsible for recommending candidates for agency jobs across the breadth of the federal government. Some of those advisers come from industries for which they are now in charge of finding top regulators.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The mission of our team will be clear: put together the most highly qualified group of successful leaders who will be able to implement our change agenda in Washington,” the transition team announced Friday afternoon.  The surprise moves will sideline Mr. Christie, who had been in charge of the transition for several months. After Mr. Christie dropped out of the Republican primary race, he became a staunch supporter of Mr. Trump. But his standing has fallen recently as two former aides were convicted in the scandal involving the closing of access lanes at the George Washington Bridge in 2013.  In a statement, Mr. Christie said that he is “proud to have run the pre-election phase of the transition team” and said that he looks forward to working with Mr. Pence. “I want to thank President-elect Trump for the opportunity to continue to help lead in this next phase,” Mr. Christie wrote.  Photo  Two people familiar with the reorganization discussion said Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, had wanted to marginalize Mr. Christie, who had come to recognize that he was not in the running to serve as a top adviser in Mr. Trump’s White House. It was unclear whether concerns about his ability to be confirmed might prevent him from being offered a cabinet post.  The changes will also push aside Richard H. Bagger, a former top aide to Mr. Christie who had been working on the transition. The transition team said Mr. Bagger will “return to the private sector” but will remain an adviser.  Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who has been a top campaign supporter, will also serve as vice chairmen of the transition, the transition team said Friday afternoon.  The 16-member advisory committee is made up of four women and 12 men. It will include several members of Congress; Rebekah Mercer, a top Republican donor; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; Peter Thiel, a founder of PayPal; Attorney General Pam Bondi of Florida; Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs executive; and Anthony Scaramucci, a hedge-fund manager and Trump supporter. Mr. Bannon will also serve on the committee. A political committee supporting Ms. Bondi received a $25,000 donation from the Trump Foundation, raising questions because it was around the time her office was reviewing allegations against Mr. Trump’s for-profit education programs.  “This team of experienced leaders will form the building blocks of our presidential transition team staff leadership roster, and will work with elected officials and tireless volunteers to prepare our government for the transfer of power on Jan. 20,” Mr. Pence said in a statement.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  There are some indications that the transition effort was slow to start, perhaps the result of Mr. Trump’s upset victory, which caught much of the political world by surprise. At least a few of the people helping organize the search for Mr. Trump were tapped at the last minute, while others have been preparing quietly for weeks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the Pentagon and the State Department, officials of the Obama administration said on Thursday that they had not yet heard from Mr. Trump’s transition team about beginning the complex work of transferring responsibilities and authority. A spokesman for the State Department said he did not have “any firm word” on when briefings might begin for designated officials from the new government.  Several people briefed on the transition process described it as somewhat chaotic after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday. His campaign was led by four leadership teams over 18 months, and most of those people were back in view on Thursday, including Corey Lewandowski, the campaign’s first manager. Mr. Lewandowski is said to have told people he would prefer a White House senior adviser role, although he has also been mentioned as a possible Republican National Committee chairman. Mr. Lewandowski resigned on Friday from his role as a CNN political commentator.  Photo  One thing is clear already: those helping Mr. Trump make the decisions are the members of his campaign’s inner circle. On Friday morning at Trump Tower in Manhattan, the president-elect’s closest aides arrived, one by one, waving to the press corps as they entered the elevators.  Trump Tower, the president-elect’s residence, has been transformed into a kind of fortress by the Secret Service and the New York police. The building has been ringed by Jersey barriers and concrete blocks marked with “NYPD.” The Secret Service has set up checkpoints on each end of 56th Street near the tower, and pedestrian access has been restricted around the building.  With just about 70 days left before the inauguration, Mr. Trump’s administration is largely being assembled behind the scenes. But like much else in the nation’s capital, little stays secret for long.  The list of names being mentioned as possibilities for crucial posts in Mr. Trump’s cabinet is growing by the hour, giving official Washington what it craves most: a never-ending parlor game as speculation grows about who might actually get a nod.  The latest to be swept into the speculation is Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, who was mentioned as a possible candidate for secretary of the Treasury by CNBC. Officials with the Trump transition team said they reached out informally to Mr. Dimon, who was clear he did not want the post.  Aides to Mr. Trump have declined to confirm who is on the short list for cabinet posts. And despite the president-elect’s return to Twitter on Thursday night, he has so far said nothing specific about his possible picks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The critical position of chief of staff — the gatekeeper for the president inside the West Wing — is expected to come down to a choice between Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus. The two men spent more than an hour in a meeting on Friday at Trump Tower.  Mr. Giuliani told CNN on Thursday that he might accept an appointment as attorney general, saying that “there’s probably nobody that knows the Justice Department better than me.”  Mr. Mnuchin, who served as Mr. Trump’s campaign finance chairman, is said to be a serious contender for Treasury secretary (though Carl Icahn, the investor, and Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, have also been mentioned in the news media).
Steven Tong, holding a Donald J. Trump sign, and Anthony McBride behind him, wearing a “BE YRSLF” T-shirt, in the San Jose Convention Center parking garage. Patrick Tehan/Bay Area News Group  It was a fleeting confrontation between two strangers that might have otherwise been forgotten.  But the tussle over a Donald J. Trump campaign sign after a June rally in San Jose, Calif., has already sent one man, Anthony McBride, to jail for six days, and left another, Steven Tong, lamenting the loss of civility in our democracy.  The rally where these two lives collided by happenstance erupted into one of the most violent episodes of this contentious presidential election. Video footage of protesters punching, egging and tackling Trump supporters went viral, sparking outrage among Republicans and soul-searching among Democrats.  Today, the clashes between ordinary people like Mr. McBride and Mr. Tong are playing out in the California courts, in a series of criminal prosecutions brought about as Republican officials accused a city led by Democrats of failing to protect Trump supporters at the rally.  The San Jose rally and its aftermath may be the most powerful illustrations of the dangerous polarization that has gripped the country during the 2016 election.  But a closer look at Mr. Tong, one of rally’s 24 victims, and Mr. McBride, one of 22 people charged with crimes after the event, suggests that there is much that the two men share. The economic struggles and personal dreams that guided them that day are not so different, after all.  Trump supporters waiting to meet the Republican presidential candidate after he spoke on June 2 in San Jose. Damon Winter/The New York Times  On June 2, Mr. Tong woke up in his parents’ house, where he has lived for the past three years, ever since he found himself unable to afford a place of his own.  He is 46, an age he does not like saying out loud because it reminds him how far he is from where he had hoped to be. He had dreamed of becoming a product designer and starting his own company. But art school was too expensive and he left after only a year.  “Companies like Facebook and these so-called social networking companies here in Silicon Valley became the economy,” he said.  “If your occupation is in anything other than that,” he added, “there are not a whole lot of jobs.”  Police officers formed a line to contain protesters outside the rally in San Jose. Noah Berger/Associated Press  Mr. Tong’s faith in the American Dream has been shaken. But that day, he had a ticket to see Mr. Trump speak about making America great again. Despite the sweltering heat, Mr. Tong parked in the garage at the San Jose Convention Center and walked a few blocks to the rally.  That same morning, Anthony McBride, who is anti-Trump, woke up in his friend’s mother’s apartment, where he has lived for the past three years, ever since he found himself unable to afford a place of his own.  He is 21, too young to carry the stain of life’s disappointments. He dreams of being a fashion designer and starting his own company. But art school is too expensive. He works two jobs — at a car dealership and a clothing store — to save for it.  He also designs shirts that read “BE YRSLF.”  He hopes they will inspire “a movement where people are just being themselves and are not following trends or what society says they have to be,” he said.  Mr. McBride’s faith in the American Dream remains intact, but it is marred by the bigotry that he sees as a product of Mr. Trump’s campaign. On the morning of the rally, Mr. McBride put on a “BE YRSLF” T-shirt and boarded the light rail to the convention center, eager to see for himself what a Trump event was really like.  Steven Tong  “It was hot that day,” Mr. Tong recalled. “I was still debating whether or not I wanted to go, and I just kind of thought, ‘Oh, I got to show my support.’”  In the convention hall, Mr. Tong delighted in the diverse makeup of the crowd.  “I was really surprised,” he said. A rally he had attended earlier in the spring in Southern California, he said, “was mostly Caucasian and middle-aged.” But in San Jose, a city that is about 30 percent Asian and 30 percent Hispanic, more minorities turned out.  Outside the hall, beyond the police barricades, protesters waved signs demanding socialism. Young men handed out the Revolutionary Communist Party’s newspaper.  Like many Asians in San Jose, Mr. Tong was born in Vietnam. He was 4 when Communists captured Saigon.  His family had three strikes against it: His father had worked with the United States military. His grandfather had an import-export business. And they hailed from China, a country that once colonized Vietnam. Officials forced Mr. Tong’s family to move to a remote hut with a dirt floor.  “The Communist philosophy was, ‘If you are a teacher, a professor, an intellectual, wealthy, then we are going to make you suffer,’” Mr. Tong said.  When he was 9, his family made it to California. Like others who had fled Vietnam, they embraced the Republican Party’s strong anticommunism stance.  Mr. Tong considers himself a moderate. During the booming 1990s, he once cast a ballot for Bill Clinton. He says he does not agree with Mr. Trump’s remarks about immigrants and Mexicans.  Still, Mr. Tong feels anxious about the racial unrest flaring up across the country. Like many Trump supporters, he blames President Obama.  “He seems more polarizing,” Mr. Tong said of Mr. Obama. “He stirs people up.”  Mr. Tong once felt boundless optimism about the United States. His parents, who worked entry-level jobs in electronics, had been able to buy a three-bedroom home in a well-off San Jose suburb. But now Mr. Tong cannot afford to rent — let alone buy — a home of his own. He was drawn to the June rally by Mr. Trump’s promise to make America as strong as it was when Mr. Tong arrived in the country.  Mr. Trump took the stage and declared, “We have a country that’s not working anymore.”  “We have a chance to be greater than ever before,” he told the crowd.  Mr. Tong left the rally clutching a sign: “The silent majority stands with Trump.”  He meandered back to his car, chatting with a teenager from Mexico who held a sign opposing Trump. They joked about trading signs. Nothing seemed threatening or out of the ordinary. But when Mr. Tong reached the parking garage, he witnessed something shocking: protesters trying to steal Trump hats off the heads of an older Hispanic couple.  He added: “At that moment, I felt the whole crowd surrounding me. You’re fearing for your life.”  Mr. Tong ran into the garage. He noticed a tall black man coming behind him.  Anthony McBride  It was Mr. McBride’s day off, he recalled. “I slept in, watched some TV,” he said.  While checking Twitter, he noticed that Mr. Trump was coming to town.  Mr. McBride hoped to get into the rally “to go experience what he says for myself,” he said. But a wall of police officers blocked the entrance. So he drifted to the “free speech” area, where protesters — including some friends from Oak Grove, where he had gone to high school — gathered. Mr. McBride had fond memories of Oak Grove, even though he was asked to leave it.  Mr. McBride was in jail for six days, accused of vandalism, battery and the attempted theft of Mr. Tong’s sign. Jim Wilson/The New York Times  In his senior year, he had attended a basketball game against a suburban school from a more affluent community. Rival fans chanted that Oak Grove students were on welfare. Mr. McBride said he and his friends responded with their own chant, “We drive sober” — a painful reference to a drunken-driving death the rival school had recently suffered. Afterward, Mr. McBride said, school authorities asked him to finish his credits with independent study. (The school’s principal declined to comment.)  At the time, Mr. McBride lived with his aunt, who told him he had to be in school to stay with her. He ended up on the couch in the apartment of his best friend’s mother. Three years later, he is still there.  Mr. McBride considers himself a moderate. He opposes amnesty for undocumented immigrants. He believes that the entrepreneurial spirit should be rewarded.  But it is racism — not government regulation of the economy — that worries him. The son of an African-American father and an Irish mother he has not seen since he was 4, Mr. McBride blames the recent racial unrest on injustice, not Democratic politicians.  “People are just frustrated,” he said. “With police brutality. With feeling not equal to white people.”  To Mr. McBride’s generation, the spate of high-profile police killings of black people shows the limits of politics and the need for activism. Protests — not the election of a black president — have brought a modicum of justice.  Joining the gathering crowd outside the convention center, Mr. McBride felt he had justice on his side.  At first, he said, it felt like a carnival outside the arena. People danced to Mexican music. Street vendors sold watermelon.  But then the rally inside ended. Trump supporters poured out. Protesters chanted obscenities at them. They hurled insults back.  A blonde woman named Rachel Casey, who was wearing a Trump shirt, filmed herself sticking her middle finger up at the crowd. Protesters traded insults with her as she drifted past the police barricades to the Marriott Hotel next door. Protesters surrounded her in the doorway.  Then someone threw a piece of watermelon.  “I was in the front, just clapping,” Mr. McBride said. “Someone in the back started throwing eggs. One of them hit me. I was like, ‘Wow, who brought eggs?’”  A hotel security guard opened the door and Ms. Casey slipped inside. The crowd marched on. A black female protester burning an American flag got into a shoving match with a white female Trump supporter. A white teenager got scared and started running. A black teenager tackled him. A first-generation Mexican who opposes Mr. Trump punched in the nose a third-generation Mexican who supports the candidate.  Protesters surrounded a woman named Rachel Casey, who was wearing a Trump shirt, outside the Marriott Hotel in San Jose, Calif. This video contains profanity. By NBCUniversal Archives on June 2, 2016. Photo by Josh Edelson/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images.  The police later traced the most violent run-ins to “local gangsters” with long criminal records, according to Sgt. Brian Anderson, who headed the San Jose police team that pored over thousands of hours of videos from the rally.  Some Oak Grove High School students were also charged. “Several of them were good students and athletes, but they decided to forget their upbringing,” Sergeant Anderson said.  Mr. McBride might have fit into in that category. He was an athlete, but he said his father, who works at a warehouse, allowed him to play sports only if he got good grades.  But Mr. McBride admits that he got angry that day at the rally. He says Trump supporters mistook him for Mexican and shouted insults at him.  “I heard, ‘Go back to your country, wetback,’” he said. He started taking every Trump sign he saw and ripping it in half.  He followed a wave of protesters into a parking garage. That’s where he spotted an Asian man with a Trump sign.  “I was kind of disappointed in him,” Mr. McBride recalled. “He’s a minority, and I didn’t see why he’s supporting Trump.”  Mr. McBride snatched Mr. Tong’s sign. Mr. Tong grabbed it back. For a split second, they held it together, in a tug of war. Mr. McBride could see the fear in Mr. Tong’s eyes.  Months later, Mr. Tong looked back at the encounter and wondered about Mr. McBride. Was he a college student?  “He didn’t seem like a gangster,” Mr. Tong recalled. “There are protesters who are just upset, and I think if I was in their position, I’d be upset, too. But no protester — no matter how angry they are — can break things and harass people.”  Maybe because of the stress of what happened to him at the rally, Mr. Tong dreams of escaping on Election Day. He thinks about camping in Death Valley on Nov. 8 just so he can get away from the news. But sometimes he has the opposite desire. He wants to visit an old friend — a black man he met in a long-ago photography class — so they can have political debates about Mr. Obama that he keeps bottled up inside.  Meanwhile, Mr. McBride thinks back on that moment and regrets being the source of Mr. Tong’s fear.  “I’d probably have been afraid, too,” Mr. McBride said. “I didn’t agree with any of the fighting.”  But two weeks after the rally, police officers showed up at Mr. McBride’s job at the mall and asked him to answer some questions. Mr. McBride, who has no criminal record, cooperated. He did not ask for a lawyer. “I wasn’t scared because I didn’t do anything,” he said.  He said he told them everything he could remember. Afterward, he expected to be allowed to go home. Instead, they handcuffed him and took him to jail, where he remained for six days, accused of vandalism, battery and the attempted theft of Mr. Tong’s sign.  On a recent Wednesday, Mr. McBride sat in court on a row of benches filled with black and Hispanic men, nearly all of them represented by a single public defender.  “McBride? You’re our Trump guy, right?” she asked.  She explained that because of what he had told the police about the confrontation outside the rally, prosecutors were adding a new charge: the false imprisonment of Ms. Casey, who had been egged.  “We’ll try to get it down to ‘disturbing the peace,’” she said. “I don’t know if we’re going to get there, but that’s our goal.”  Now Mr. McBride, who cannot afford a lawyer, is not sure if he should plead guilty to a crime he doesn’t feel he committed, or fight the charges. He thinks about that moment when he grabbed Mr. Tong’s sign, and about what made him let it go.
HOW MR. RYAN RESPONDED  “If a person wants to be the nominee of the Republican Party, there can be no evasion and no games. They must reject any group or cause that is built on bigotry. This party does not prey on people’s prejudices. We appeal to their highest ideals. This is the party of Lincoln.”
While young people, poor people and Hispanics are often singled out for low voting rates, there are millions of nonvoters in every demographic group. In fact, the majority of people who didn’t vote in the 2012 presidential election were white, middle-income and middle-aged.  Participation by eligible voters in the 2012 presidential election Voted Did not vote White RACE Black Hispanic Asian Less than $20K INCOME $20K to $50K $50K to $100K $100K or more 18-29 AGE 30-39 40-64 65+ 80 million people 60 40 20 0 20 40 Did not vote Voted RACE White Black Hispanic Asian INCOME Less than $20K $20K to $50K $50K to $100K $100K or more AGE 18-29 30-39 40-64 65+ 80 million 60 40 20 0 20 40 Did not vote Voted White Black Hispanic Asian Less than $20K $20K to $50K $50K to $100K $100K or more 18-29 30-39 40-64 65+ 80 million 60 40 20 0 20 40 Voted Did not vote White RACE Black Hispanic Asian Less than $20K INCOME $20K to $50K $50K to $100K $100K or more 18-29 AGE 30-39 40-64 65+ 80 million people 60 40 20 0 20 40  But what distinguishes voters from nonvoters can be only partly explained by demographics. Experts say individuals tend to be motivated by a combination of their priorities, their group culture, how competitive their state is, and how easy or hard it is to vote.  The richer, older and more educated you are, the more likely you are to vote .  At the individual level, education and income are still two of the strongest predictors of whether someone will turn out at the polls.  “Most of the differences between people who vote and those who don’t vote can be accounted for by motivational reasons — levels of political interest and engagement,” said Benjamin Highton, a professor of political science at the University of California, Davis. “And levels of political interest and engagement are strongly correlated with education and income.”  Voting rates in the 2012 presidential election  While education increases political knowledge and engagement, the factors that drive an individual to pursue education may be the same ones that lead to participation in politics.  Age is also strongly correlated to voting. One explanation is that as people get older, they tend to own homes, pay more taxes and have less residential mobility, increasing their stakes in the political system. Voting rates begin to fall when people reach their late 70s, as health and mobility obstacles make it harder to get to the polls.  Among voters with little education, African-Americans are 1.7 times more likely to vote than whites.  There are also group dynamics that influence voting rates across racial and ethnic lines. Even when statistics are adjusted for income and education, there are large gaps among rates for whites, blacks and Hispanics in the United States. Black voters, particularly women, have the highest turnout rates over all. The turnout gap with whites is most pronounced at lower levels of income and education.  Voting rates in the 2012 presidential election  Experts give several explanations for high black turnout, which has increased by nearly 20 percentage points since the mid-1990s. The presidential campaigns of Jesse Jackson and Barack Obama encouraged more African-Americans to register to vote, and black churches have played a strong role in mobilization.  African-Americans are also more reliable partisan voters — more than 90 percent voted for President Obama in 2012 — so Democrats may be more likely to put resources toward getting them to turn out than other groups.  Turnout rates for Hispanic voters are much lower over all. Language barriers and weaker connections to the political system are part of the explanation, said Melissa R. Michelson, a professor of political science at Menlo College in California. “There’s this idea that even if you are legally entitled to vote, you don’t see it as something that matters to you and your community,” she said.  Voting rates for Hispanics in the 2012 presidential election  But Hispanic voters are not a homogeneous group. Hispanics who are naturalized citizens are more likely to vote than those born in the United States. Immigrant communities perceive a higher stake in election outcomes, Professor Michelson said.  “Being an immigrant has become a politicized identity, and there’s a very clear connection between your identity as an immigrant and what’s going on in the political areas,” she said.  In Florida, the gap between Hispanics and other racial groups is smaller, in part because the state has a large number of Cuban-Americans, who tend to be wealthier and more educated.  Upper Midwesterners are model voters, while Hawaii residents regularly stay home.  Range of voting rates in U.S. presidential elections since 1980 Note: States are grouped by U.S. Census Bureau region  In states with competitive races, people may have a sense that their vote matters more, and campaigns will pour more resources into getting out the vote. Some of the worst turnout rates in recent cycles have been in Hawaii and West Virginia, which have had some of the largest margins — favoring Democrats in Hawaii and Republicans in West Virginia.  State voting laws like registration deadlines, early and no-excuse absentee voting, and voter identification also dictate some of the differences in turnout among states, but the effects appear to be minimal.  Experts cite same-day registration as the policy with the best potential for increasing turnout, but the true effect can be hard to measure because it is often adopted in places that already have an active voting culture, like Upper Midwestern states.  While research shows that minorities are disproportionately affected by voter identification laws, which Republican governors and Republican-controlled state legislatures have fought to expand in recent years, there has been mixed evidence on whether the laws have significantly reduced turnout. Political scientists say mobilization in response to the laws may have helped to counter the effects.  Turnout in the U.S. is lower than in Canada, Mexico and most of Europe.  Western Europe Asia and Oceana Northern Europe Southern Europe Eastern Europe Americas 90% Belgium Australia Turnout among voting-age population Turkey Sweden Denmark South Korea 80% Iceland Norway Israel New Zealand Finland France Netherlands 70% Austria Italy Germany Mexico Portugal Hungary Greece Canada U.K. Spain 60% Czech Repub. Slovakia Ireland Estonia Luxembourg Poland Slovenia U.S. Japan Latvia 50% Chile 40% Switzerland Western Europe Asia and Oceana Northern Europe Southern Europe Eastern Europe Americas 90% Belgium Australia Turnout among voting-age population Turkey Sweden Denmark 80% South Korea Iceland Norway Israel New Zealand Finland France Netherlands 70% Austria Italy Germany Mexico Portugal Hungary Greece Canada U.K. Spain 60% Czech Repub. Slovakia Ireland Estonia Luxembourg Poland Slovenia U.S. Japan Latvia 50% Chile 40% Switzerland Western Europe Asia and Oceana Northern Europe Southern Europe Eastern Europe Americas 90% Turnout among voting-age population Belgium Australia Turkey Sweden Denmark 80 S. Korea Iceland Norway Israel New Zealand Finland France Netherlands 70 Austria Italy Germany Mexico Portugal Hungary Greece Canada U.K. Czech Repub. Spain 60 Slovakia Ireland Estonia Luxembourg Poland Slovenia U.S. Japan Latvia 50 Chile 40 Switzerland Source: Pew Research Center analysis of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development data  In the 2012 United States presidential election, about 58 percent of eligible voters turned out. That rate, which was generally on par with other United States presidential elections in the modern era, trails rates for most other developed countries. (The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development uses rates for entire voting-age populations, not just eligible citizens, so the United States rate shown is 53.6 percent.)  Some structural differences are at play: Several countries at the top of the list, including Belgium, Australia and Turkey, have laws requiring citizens to vote. Others automatically register, or are more active in registering, their citizens.  Systems of proportional representation, in which multiple parties earn seats based on the vote, have also been found to encourage participation in elections.  But many experts argue that low turnout isn’t a problem.  Some prominent studies have concluded that 100 percent participation would not result in significantly different election outcomes. Still, differences in preferences between voters and nonvoters could make a difference at the margins. A 2012 Pew Research Center poll found that nonvoters were more likely to support Mr. Obama, and research suggests that if low-income voters were more proportionally represented, lawmakers would prioritize policies that favor income redistribution.
Photo  Donald J. Trump’s comments and behavior toward women have been the subject of criticism over the course of his presidential campaign. The revelation on Friday that Mr. Trump spoke about women in vulgar and degrading terms was the latest in a string of disclosures in which the Republican presidential nominee has been accused of unwelcome advances, unsettling workplace conduct and lewd comments. Below is a look at some of those episodes as reported by The New York Times:  How Trump behaved with women  The Times interviewed dozens of women who had worked with or for Mr. Trump over the past four decades, in the worlds of real estate, modeling and pageants; women who had dated him or interacted with him socially; and women and men who had closely observed his conduct since his adolescence. (Crossing the Line: How Donald Trump Behaved With Women in Private, May 14, 2016)  Their accounts revealed unwelcome romantic advances, unending commentary on the female form, a shrewd reliance on ambitious women and unsettling workplace conduct. The interactions occurred in his offices at Trump Tower, at his homes, at construction sites and backstage at beauty pageants.  The Times spoke with Temple Taggart, a 21-year-old Miss Utah, who was startled by how forward Mr. Trump was with young contestants like her in 1997, his first year as an owner of Miss USA, a branch of the beauty pageant organization. As she recalls it, he introduced himself in an unusually intimate manner.  “He kissed me directly on the lips. I thought: ‘Oh, my gosh. Gross.’ He was married to Marla Maples at the time. I think there were a few other girls that he kissed on the mouth. I was like, ‘Wow, that’s inappropriate.’”  After watching the newly released recording of Mr. Trump bragging about pushing himself on women and kissing them without permission, Ms. Taggart said she sees her own experience in a new and harsher light.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It was like, ‘Thank you.’ Now no one can say I made this up,” Ms. Taggart said in an interview on Saturday.  The Times also interviewed Alicia Machado, a former Miss Universe, whom Mr. Trump shamed repeatedly for putting on weight. In addition to private scolding, Mr. Trump, who was an executive producer of the pageant, insisted on accompanying Ms. Machado, then a teenager, to a gym, where dozens of reporters and cameramen watched as she exercised.  Mr. Trump, in his trademark suit and tie, posed for photographs beside her as she burned calories in front of members of the news media. “This is somebody who likes to eat,” Mr. Trump said from inside the gym.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  After Hillary Clinton brought up Ms. Machado during the first presidential debate, Mr. Trump went on Twitter and began a burst of digital fury, mocking her as a “con,” the “worst” and “disgusting.”  The Republican presidential nominee finished by claiming that she had appeared in a “sex tape.” Fact checkers have found no evidence of such a tape, rather just a risqué clip that was filed as part of a reality TV show.  A history of insults and tasteless comments  Mr. Trump has also been criticized for his comments toward women with whom he has had public disagreements.  ■ After the first Republican primary debate, Mr. Trump suggested that Megyn Kelly, a Fox journalist and one of the debate moderators, had questioned him forcefully because she was menstruating. “You could see there was blood coming out of her eyes, blood coming out of her wherever,” Mr. Trump said.  ■ Mr. Trump has had a long-running public feud with the entertainer Rosie O’Donnell, who criticized him over his treatment of a 20-year-old Miss USA winner. Mr. Trump called Ms. O’Donnell “disgusting” and “a slob” with “a fat, ugly face”; referred to Ms. O’Donnell, who had come out as a lesbian, “a degenerate”; and called her “fat”, “rude, crude and not smart” and “a mentally sick woman, a bully, a dummy and, above all, a loser.”  And he has a history of speaking in lewd terms of women’s looks and his own sexual prowess, particularly during appearances on Howard Stern’s radio show.  ■ “A person who is flat-chested is very hard to be a 10,” Mr. Trump said to Mr. Stern in 2005.  ■ During the Republican primary campaign, Mr. Trump criticized the appearance of one of his opponents, Carly Fiorina, saying she was too ugly to be elected. “Look at that face! Would anyone vote for that? Can you imagine that, the face of our next president? I mean, she’s a woman, and I’m not supposed to say bad things, but really, folks, come on. Are we serious?” Mr. Trump said in an interview with Rolling Stone magazine.
NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
The politician who may help determine the winner of the presidential election travels without an entourage, flies coach and browses Yelp when he needs to find a place to grab a quick bite to eat between campaign stops.  Gary Johnson, the Libertarian Party’s candidate for president, will be on the presidential ballot in all 50 states, the first time a third-party candidate has managed that feat in 20 years. And if current polls hold true — they have him in the high single digits — he may be on track to win more votes than any third-party peer since the Texas billionaire Ross Perot ran as an independent in 1992.  But Mr. Johnson, a 63-year-old former governor of New Mexico, is walking a lonely road. While his name may be familiar, his face is not: He is rarely recognized as he hustles through airport taxi lines, wheeling his own luggage.  Last week, he missed the chance to make his case to more than 80 million Americans, when he fell shy of the 15 percent polling average needed for inclusion in the first presidential debate. Even his running mate, William Weld, a former Republican governor of Massachusetts, has been playing down the strength of their ticket, saying that he is not sure anyone is more qualified to be president than Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee.
Donald J. Trump staked his primary campaign on an unwavering, hard-line position on immigration, complete with mass deportations, a temporary ban on Muslim immigration and a border wall paid for by Mexico. Recently he said he was open to “softening” on his positions. Here’s a look at how the Republican candidate’s positions on immigration have changed, or remained the same, throughout the campaign, including Wednesday’s big policy speech.  The Border Wall Then There must be a wall across the southern border. ... Mexico must pay for the wall. Trump releases immigration plan, Aug. 16, 2015 Now We will build a great wall along the southern border. And Mexico will pay for the wall. One hundred percent. They don’t know it yet but they’re going to pay for it. Immigration speech, Aug. 31, 2016 Mr. Trump has promised -- steadfastly and repeatedly -- to build a wall along the southern border, and has said that Mexico would pay for its construction through increased border-crossing fees and NAFTA tarriffs. Some of his surrogates, like Rick Perry and Rudolph W. Giuliani, have recently referred to a "digital wall" -- meaning technology would be used to track and prevent and prevent illegal immigration -- but Mr. Trump has been adamant about the physical boundary since announcing his plan.  Deportation of 11 Million Undocumented Immigrants Then We got to move 'em out, we're going to move 'em back in if they're really good people. CNN interview, July 30, 2015 Now We are going to deport many people, many, many people. ...We're going to do that vigorously, we're going to go with the laws that are existing, but we're going to have a very strong border and we're not going to have people pouring back in. CNN interview with Anderson Cooper, Aug. 25, 2016 For many hard-line conservatives, anything short of deporting the 11 million or so undocumented immigrants in the country amounts to a form of "amnesty." Mr. Trump initially appealed to them through his promise to have them all "gone," but he seemed to walk back this position recently when he said he was open to "softening" on some of his immigration policies. In his speech, Mr. Trump declined to say whether he would forcibly deport all undocumented immigrants already here, but laid out numerous proposals that would lead to expedited deportations for millions of undocumented immigrants.  Deportation Force Then You're going to have a deportation force, and you're going to do it humanely. On MSNBC's "Morning Joe", Nov. 11, 2015 Now Within ICE, I am going to create a new special deportation task force focused on identifying and quickly removing the most dangerous criminal illegal immigrants in America, who have evaded justice. Immigration speech, Aug. 31, 2016 Removing undocumented immigrants from the United States was a cornerstone of Mr. Trump's initial appeal to conservatives in the Republican Party, and also one of his most ambitious and potentially expensive policies. The approach also initially put him at odds with other Republicans who saw unconditional deportation as being unrealistic and lacking compassion. In his immigration speech, he spoke of creating a “deportation task force” to focus on the “most dangerous” undocumented immigrants who have committed crimes.  Deportation of Criminals Then All criminal aliens must be returned to their home countries, a process which can be aided by canceling any visas to foreign countries which will not accept their own criminals, and making it a separate and additional crime to commit an offense while here illegally. Trump releases immigration plan, Aug. 16, 2015 Now Their days have run out in this country. The crime will stop. They’re going to be gone. It will be over. They’re going out fast. Moving forward, we will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings. Immigration speech, Aug. 31, 2016 Undocumented immigrants who commit crimes have been the focus of Mr. Trump's deportation plans. He has featured families of victims in campaign ads and invited them to speak at his rallies. He has not wavered on this position.  Path to Legal Status Then I would get people out and I would have an expedited way of getting them back into the country so they can be legal. CNN interview, July 30, 2015 Now For those here today illegally who are seeking legal status, they will have one route and one route only: to return home and apply for re-entry like everybody else under the rules of the new legal immigration system that I have outlined above. Immigration speech, Aug. 31, 2016 Mr. Trump was not a supporter of legalization initially. He forcefully criticized Senator Marco Rubio of Florida during the primary for his work on bipartisan immigration legislation that included a path to legal status, saying Mr. Rubio was for "amnesty" and denounced Senator Ted Cruz of Texas for a similar position. But reports that Mr. Trump was open to legalization initiated a week of mixed messages from the candidate. Mr. Trump offered a direct rebuttal in his speech, saying that there will be no path for legal status for anyone who entered the country illegally.  Visa Tracking Then Individuals who refuse to leave at the time their visa expires should be subject to criminal penalties. ... Completion of a visa tracking system – required by law but blocked by lobbyists – will be necessary as well. Trump immigration plan, Aug. 16, 2015 Now We will finally complete the biometric entry-exit visa tracking system which we need. … Removing visa overstays will be a top priority of my administration. Immigration speech, Aug. 31, 2016 In his initial immigration plan, Mr. Trump called for "enhanced penalties for overstaying a visa," but did not explicitly call for such visitors to be removed. This is one of the few shifts in his immigration policy in which he has actually developed a more aggressive approach than his position during the primaries. It's also similar to a policy from the bipartisan Senate legislation that called for improvements to the visa tracking system, but did not include a provision for their "quick removal."  Nationwide E-Verify Then Nationwide E-verify. This simple measure will protect jobs for unemployed Americans. Trump immigration plan, Aug. 16, 2015 Now We will ensure that E-verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law, and will work with Congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country. Immigration speech, Aug. 31, 2016 E-Verify has been a cornerstone of Republican immigration platforms since 2013, when it was included in the bipartisan Gang of Eight immigration reform bill that ultimately failed in the Senate. But it was also frequently mentioned by his chief Republican rivals, like Jeb Bush, which could explain why Mr. Trump avoided much discussion on the topic in the primaries.
“Kill her.”  “Trump that bitch!”  “Build a wall — kill them all.”  New York Times reporters have spent over a year covering Donald J. Trump’s rallies, witnessing so many provocations and heated confrontations at them that the cumulative effect can be numbing: A sharp sting that quickly dulls from repetition.  But what struck us was the frequency with which some Trump supporters use coarse, vitriolic, even violent language — in the epithets they shout and chant, the signs they carry, the T-shirts they wear — a pattern not seen in connection with any other recent political candidate, in any party.  Not everyone attending a Trump rally behaves this way. In fact, many are polite and well mannered. But while protesters are often shouted down, crowds seldom express disapproval of the crude slogans and angry outbursts by Mr. Trump’s supporters. Indeed, these displays have become inextricably bound with the Trump show itself — as much as the snaking entrance lines and the calls to “build a wall” along the border with Mexico.  With that in mind, we set out to record the shouts, slogans, imprecations and interactions among audience members that set Trump events apart from other political gatherings. We also obtained recordings from others in attendance, who sometimes were closer to the action.  The resulting compilation gives a sense of what we saw – from Maine to North Carolina, from Ohio to Arizona.
July 2015 Government investigators say they found classified information in emails from Mrs. Clinton’s server. The emails were not marked classified at the time, and it is unclear if Mrs. Clinton knew that the information was classified. The investigators refer the matter to the Justice Department, and shortly thereafter the F.B.I. opens an investigation.  January 2016 The State Department announces that it will not release 22 emails that contain “top secret” material. The classifications of the emails were increased after the fact; they were not marked when they were sent. Three days later, the first presidential primary is held in Iowa.  May 2016 The State Department’s inspector general releases a report criticizing Mrs. Clinton’s use of the private server, saying that she should have asked for approval and that she had violated department policies by not surrendering her emails before leaving office.
Since the dawn of the television age, the campaign news conference has mostly been a dreaded and rote affair – the setting for robotic apologies and questions that double as land mines. What good could possibly come of them?  Donald J. Trump has found an answer.  With shrewd showmanship and calculated irreverence, his year-old candidacy has turned the tired ritual of holding court from behind a lectern into a frequently riveting spectacle of self-promotion and media manipulation. His stadium-size rallies for voters are still his calling card. But the intimate news conference is where Mr. Trump has turned political convention on its head.  Let Hillary Clinton deliver polished policy speeches until November. Now that Mr. Trump is the presumptive Republican nominee, he will be busy starring in his news conferences, selling steaks, hotels and, of course, himself.  Fact-challenged claims will be uttered. Punchy slogans will be repeated. Rhetorical walls will be built. And Americans will either be mesmerized or appalled by the performance.
How Election Results Really Work  With 13 more Election Days, the primary season still has a long way to go. Here we answer your questions about how live election results are reported and published on the New York Times website and apps.  How does the Times get live election results?  Our live results and delegate counts are reported by The Associated Press. This is a large effort that includes sending correspondents to local government offices and having reporters gather vote tallies from state, county and other local officials, along with using data feeds from local governments. Election officials usually start releasing results after polls close.  How often are the results updated on election night?  Once The A.P. checks the vote totals, it sends updated data to The Times and other customers every three to five minutes. Race calls are sent immediately.  Times journalists have written software that automatically downloads and publishes the results, which takes only a few seconds. Don’t worry about refreshing the page. Results update automatically.  How does the Times call the winner of primary races?  We rely on The A.P.’s calls. This is how The A.P. describes its process for calling races:    The responsibility for calling races rests with experienced staff in each state. They are armed with on-the-ground knowledge that no other national news organization can match. Plus, they have information on demographics, absentee and other voting history and political issues that may affect the outcome of races they must call. On election night, they are assisted by experts in A.P.’s Washington bureau who examine exit poll numbers and votes as they are counted. A “decision desk” in Washington, headed by the Washington bureau chief, has the final signoff on all top-of-the-ticket calls.      How can The Times call a race before any votes are counted, as it did in Georgia, Vermont and Virginia?  News organizations can project a winner, even with no results, because elections tend to have predictable voting patterns.  Hillary Clinton polled well ahead of Bernie Sanders in Southern states and was named the winner of Georgia and Virginia immediately after polls closed. Mr. Sanders was declared the winner of his home state of Vermont before any results were released.  Most major media organizations wait until polls are closed before calling a winner.  Why do I see different vote counts on different websites?  State parties and governments may display their own results. Because these numbers are collected separately from The A.P., the two vote counts may not match until all votes are counted.  Some media organizations collect results independently of The A.P. Caucusgoers also informally post results on social media.  What’s a precinct, anyway?  A precinct is the smallest level at which election results are reported. A precinct may be a few city blocks or an entire county.  Why do states like Florida and Ohio have large vote counts with few or no precincts reporting?  Absentee and early votes may be announced before officials release results from votes cast on Election Day. The number of precincts reporting may remain at zero until Election Day votes are released.  Why do vote totals change after all precincts have reported?  This can happen for a number of reasons: Absentee ballots weren’t included at first and now they are; the local government hadn’t finished counting; an error was spotted and fixed. According to The A.P., some jurisdictions are moving away from the traditional count of precincts reporting as a measure of election night tabulation progress.  Officials might report just early votes for all precincts, mistakenly marking all precincts as being reported, before Election Day votes are added. Some counties use vote centers, which are polling places where a voter from anywhere in the county can cast a ballot. It is difficult to indicate how many precincts are reporting in these situations. This is why the number of precincts reporting may go down during live results.  Why do the results for Iowa show only 701 votes for Hillary Clinton?  Sometimes, the vote totals reported by the state or party are not the actual votes cast, but rather some other measure, such as the number of delegates supporting each candidate that were elected to the state convention.  Why do some states show less than 100 percent reporting after an election is over?  The A.P. said:  Frequently the transmission of precinct results to the county or city is manual — someone actually bringing a thumb drive from an optical scanner to the county, or bringing the precincts’ actual ballots to the county to be scanned there. It is not unusual for there to be mislaid cartridges or ballots left in a locked-up polling place on election night.  Even when the transmission of the precinct results to the county is electronic, there are inevitably precincts that don’t get sent because of bad thumb drives, no Wi-Fi connection, etc. And in some primaries in smaller counties there might literally be no voters casting a ballot for one party. So that might cause confusion as to whether that precinct has reported.  Why do parts of New Hampshire and Maine have no votes?  Because very few people live in those areas.  What are superdelegates?  The Democratic Party has 712 unpledged delegates, party leaders who are free to support any candidate. Most superdelegates have declared support for Mrs. Clinton, though they could switch candidates if she lost the lead in pledged delegates, which are awarded based on election results.  The Republican Party has more than 100 unpledged delegates. They can also switch candidates before the national convention in July.
“A new president is really vulnerable and open to all sorts of influence by strong-willed advisers,” said Robert Dallek, a presidential historian. “Trump’s appointments over the next six weeks will be very significant because they can show whether he wants to create some unity in the country, or whether he really intends to deliver on his ideas.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  One of the influences on Mr. Trump could come from an unlikely quarter: President Obama. Meeting in the Oval Office on Thursday, Mr. Trump said he looked forward “to dealing with the president in the future, including counsel.” A day later, in interviews with The Wall Street Journal and “60 Minutes,’’ he said he had decided to retain elements of Mr. Obama’s landmark health care law after their conversation — a hint, at least, that he might govern less radically than he had campaigned.  White House officials expressed hope that Mr. Obama would be able to impress on Mr. Trump the importance of other parts of his legacy, like the Paris climate accord and the Iran nuclear deal. The two will have the kind of peer-to-peer relationship that only fellow presidents can have — something that administration officials hope will appeal to Mr. Trump’s pride, as well as his desire to succeed, and make him view Mr. Obama less as a rival.  They conceded, though, that there was little historical precedent for such a relationship, especially when the incoming president had ousted the incumbent’s party after such an acrid campaign, and that Mr. Trump and Mr. Obama were never likely to become buddies.  Mr. Trump is drawing mainly from a pool of trusted aides and supporters, according to people familiar with the campaign. On Friday, he named three of his grown children — Ivanka, Donald Jr. and Eric — as well as his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, to his transition team, an arrangement that rang alarm bells in Washington because they will also manage his businesses. The Trump family, it is clear, will wield unusual power in the composition of an administration that is already shaping up as remarkable for its clannishness.  Even within Mr. Trump’s tight circle, however, there are sharp differences in ideology, background and temperament that could play out in how the White House deals with Congress and how the United States deals with the rest of the world.  Perhaps the deepest schism is between Stephen K. Bannon, the conservative provocateur and media entrepreneur who was Mr. Trump’s campaign chairman, and Reince Priebus, the Republican Party chairman who came to terms with Mr. Trump’s candidacy. Both are on a short list for chief of staff, according to people close to the campaign, and whoever is chosen, the other is likely to get another senior White House post.  Each would bring a radically different approach to a job often called the second-most powerful in Washington — gatekeeper to the president and often the first and last person he sees in the Oval Office.  Mr. Bannon, the executive chairman of the conservative website Breitbart News and one-time Goldman Sachs executive, is an avowed enemy of House Speaker Paul D. Ryan. An anti-establishment verbal bomb thrower with ties to the alt-right movement, Mr. Bannon may have little interest in compromising with the Republican-controlled Congress under its current leadership. He is an unabashed critic of the current immigration system and repeatedly encouraged Mr. Trump to appeal to the party’s base in the closing days of the campaign with arguments against globalization.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Priebus, a party loyalist who tried to reconcile Republican leaders with their renegade nominee, would most likely build bridges to Mr. Ryan and other Republican leaders. A Washington insider with a reputation for being easy to work with, Mr. Priebus would operate a more traditional White House, though given Mr. Trump’s flamboyant personality, traditional is a relative term.  Photo  In some ways, Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus are proxies for the larger battle over what kind of president Mr. Trump will be. Some former Republican officials held out hope that Mr. Trump would be receptive to moderating influences, but others worried that he would simply listen to the last person he spoke to.  “You always have that tension between what he said to get elected and what he actually believes,” said John D. Negroponte, a former director of national intelligence under President George W. Bush. “How selective will his amnesia be?”  Mr. Negroponte, a Republican who supported Hillary Clinton in the campaign, said he could imagine senior members of Mr. Trump’s National Security Council warning him about the dangers of “cutting loose countries from our nuclear umbrella,” which Mr. Trump threatened during the campaign to do in reference to Japan and South Korea.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But there could be a parallel battle for Mr. Trump’s soul in foreign policy. Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn, a retired career intelligence officer who is Mr. Trump’s closest foreign-policy adviser, is a candidate for national security adviser, according to an internal transition document obtained by the conservative news site The Daily Caller, as is Stephen J. Hadley, who served in that capacity for Mr. Bush.  Mr. Hadley, who might also be considered for defense secretary, pushed Mr. Bush to undertake the troop surge in Iraq and is closely identified with the military interventionism of that administration. A key figure in the Republican foreign-policy establishment, Mr. Hadley had a hand in Mr. Bush’s second inaugural address, in which he called for the United States to be an evangelist in spreading democracy — something Mr. Trump has flatly rejected.  General Flynn, a registered Democrat, has criticized the neoconservative policies of the Bush administration for leading the United States into quagmires like Iraq. “They’ve gotten us into mess after mess for the wrong reasons,” he said, echoing Mr. Trump’s harsh criticism of Mr. Bush during the Republican debates. And like Mr. Trump, General Flynn is withering about the foreign-policy establishment of both parties.  It may seem counterintuitive for Mr. Trump to recruit a Bush administration veteran. But Peter D. Feaver, who worked on President Bush’s national security council and now teaches at Duke University, pointed out that Mr. Obama had campaigned “vociferously against the Iraq surge, and then asked the architect of the surge” — Robert M. Gates — “to stay.” Mr. Gates, as defense secretary, later persuaded Mr. Obama to deploy a similar surge in Afghanistan.  “You can say one thing in campaigns, and mean it,” Mr. Feaver said, “and in personnel matters, do the opposite.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The contest for top economic posts does not expose the same ideological fault lines as those for the White House or national security jobs. But it does raise red flags, given the anti-establishment, anti-Wall Street sentiment that Mr. Trump stoked during the campaign.  Several of the candidates on his short list for Treasury secretary come from Wall Street, including Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs partner who was the finance chairman of Mr. Trump’s campaign, and Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase. People close to Mr. Dimon said he was not interested in the job.  Another candidate is a conservative Texas congressman, Jeb Hensarling, who has called for the repeal the Dodd-Frank Act, the banking regulations passed after the financial crisis, during Mr. Obama’s first term.  The least predictable source of influence on Mr. Trump remains Mr. Obama. For all their differences, and the bitter words they flung at each other during the campaign, the two share traits. Both won the presidency as outsiders, and both hold their party’s foreign-policy establishment in contempt.  With Mr. Trump lacking elective-office experience or the political coterie that accompanies establishment candidates to Washington, administration officials said Mr. Obama would probably spend more time with him than was typical for other incoming and outgoing presidents.  And Mr. Trump, some outsiders predicted, would respect the advice of a president 15 years younger, whose path to the White House was nearly as improbable as his.  “If you’re looking at things from a hiring point of view, as Trump does, Obama could have done anything he wanted,” Douglas Brinkley, a professor of history at Rice University, said in reference to Mr. Obama’s career options. “That has to impress Trump.”
Her campaign said the seemingly positive outcome had only hurt it with voters who did not trust Mrs. Clinton and were receptive to Mr. Trump’s claims of a “rigged system.” In particular, white suburban women who had been on the fence were reminded of the email imbroglio and broke decidedly in Mr. Trump’s favor, aides said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After leading in polls in many battleground states, Mrs. Clinton told the donors on Saturday, “we dropped, and we had to keep really pushing to regain our advantage, which going into last weekend we had.”  “We were once again up in all but two of the battleground states, and we were up considerably in some that we ended up losing,” Mrs. Clinton said. “And we were feeling like we had to put it back together.”  Presidential candidates have a long history of blaming forces outside their control for their losses. In 2004, John Kerry linked his defeat to a videotape of Osama bin Laden that appeared days before the election, stoking fears about terrorism. In 2012, Mitt Romney told donors he had lost because President Obama had vowed to bestow “gifts” on Democratic special interests groups, namely African-Americans, Hispanics and young people.  Mrs. Clinton’s contention appears to be more rooted in reality — and hard data. An internal campaign memo with polling data said that “there is no question that a week from Election Day, Secretary Clinton was poised for a historic win,” but that, in the end, “late-breaking developments in the race proved one hurdle too many for us to overcome.”  Mrs. Clinton lost narrowly in several battleground states, and by the time all ballots are counted, she appears poised to win the popular vote by more than two million votes.  Still, Mrs. Clinton’s instinct to shun any personal responsibility angered some Democrats. Several donors on the call, while deeply bitter about Mr. Comey’s actions, said they believed that Mrs. Clinton and her campaign had suffered avoidable missteps that handed the election to an unacceptable opponent. They pointed to the campaign’s lack of a compelling message for white working-class voters and to decisions years ago by Mrs. Clinton to use a private email address at the State Department and to accept millions of dollars for speeches to Wall Street.  “There is a special place in hell for Clinton staff, allegedly including Cheryl Mills, that okayed the email server setup,” Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist and former senior aide to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, wrote on Sidewire, a social media site, referring to a longtime aide and lawyer to Mrs. Clinton.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign was so confident in her victory that her aides popped open Champagne on the campaign plane early Tuesday. But that conviction, aides would later learn, was based largely on erroneous data showing that young, black and Latino voters and suburban women who had been turned off by Mr. Trump’s comments but viewed Mrs. Clinton unfavorably would turn out for her in higher numbers than they ultimately did.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Exit polls conducted by Edison Research found that among people who said they had decided in the final week before Election Day, 47 percent voted for Mr. Trump and 42 percent for Mrs. Clinton.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As early as Wednesday morning, aides began to explain to Democrats shaken by the loss that the campaign’s sophisticated data modeling had not taken into account the bombshell F.B.I. announcement.  Mr. Comey’s letters to Congress went against the F.B.I.’s longstanding tradition of avoiding decisions that could affect elections, but he told aides that he felt he had no choice because he had already weighed in on the case so publicly. In July, he had taken the unusual step of publicly announcing that the F.B.I. would not charge Mrs. Clinton.  At the time, she believed she had finally put the issue to rest. And after the final debate on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, she emerged in such a strong position that she began to focus on campaigning for down-ballot Democrats and planned a campaign stop in traditionally Republican Arizona.  “We felt so good about where we were,” Mrs. Clinton told donors. Before Mr. Comey’s first letter to Congress, she added, “we just had a real wind at our back.”  Mr. Trump seized on the letter, telling voters in Nevada the Saturday before Election Day that “the F.B.I. has reopened its criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton,” and that the matter “would grind government to a halt” should Mrs. Clinton win the White House. The F.B.I.’s examination of the new emails did not in fact reopen the investigation.  Democratic pollsters attributed Mr. Trump’s laser-thin victories in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin — states that President Obama had won — largely to a drifting of college-educated suburban women to the Republican nominee at the last minute, because of the renewed focus on Mrs. Clinton’s email server.  “We lost with college-educated whites after leading with them all summer,” a Clinton spokesman, Brian Fallon, said on Wednesday. “Five more days of reminders about Comey, and they gravitated back to Trump.”  Before Mrs. Clinton spoke on Saturday, her finance director, Dennis Cheng, thanked the donors on the call, each of whom had raised at least $100,000. The campaign brought in nearly $1 billion to spend heavily on data efforts, to disperse hundreds of staff members to battleground states, and to air television advertisements — only to fall short to Mr. Trump’s upstart operation.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Donors conceded that, ultimately, no amount of money could match Mr. Trump’s crisp pitch, aimed at the economically downtrodden, to “make America great again.”  “You can have the greatest field program, and we did — he had nothing,” said Jay S. Jacobs, a prominent New York Democrat and donor to Mrs. Clinton. “You can have better ads, paid for by greater funds, and we did. Unfortunately, Trump had the winning argument.”  Mrs. Clinton has kept a low profile since her concession speech at a Midtown Manhattan hotel on Wednesday. On Thursday, a young mother with her 13-month-old daughter spotted Mrs. Clinton walking her dogs near her home in Chappaqua, N.Y., posting a photo of the defeated candidate on Facebook that quickly went viral along with the hashtag #ImStillWithHer.  On Friday night, Mrs. Clinton thanked volunteers on a nationwide conference call. “Look, I’m not going to sugarcoat it,” she said, sighing. “These have been very, very tough days.”
Photo  President-elect Donald J. Trump won the White House with an outsider’s populist promise to “drain the swamp” of Washington.  Now, as he prepares to assume the presidency, an open question remains about the capital he repeatedly spurned: Just how much is he willing to become a part of it?  Mr. Trump, a homebody who often flew several hours late at night during the campaign so he could wake up in his own bed in Trump Tower, is talking with his advisers about how many nights a week he will spend in the White House. He has told them he would like to do what he is used to, which is spending time in New York when he can.  The future first lady, Melania Trump, expects to move to Washington. But the couple’s 10-year-old son, Barron, is midway through a school year in New York, and it is unclear when the move would happen.  The questions reflect what Mr. Trump’s advisers described as the president-elect’s coming to grips with the fact that his life is about to change radically. They say that Mr. Trump, who was shocked when he won the election, might spend most of the week in Washington, much like members of Congress, and return to Trump Tower or his golf course in Bedminster, N.J., or his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach on weekends.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Hanging on to the familiar for presidents-elect and their families is not unusual. There were early questions about whether Michelle Obama would leave Chicago and move to the White House in early 2009 and disrupt her daughters’ school years, but the whole family moved in the day of the inaugural. Mr. Trump’s advisers hold out the possibility that the president-elect may spend more time in the White House as he grows less overwhelmed and more comfortable in the job.  Still, Mr. Trump has spent the last three decades, for the most part, cosseted within Trump Tower. His apartment is on the 58th floor, and a designated elevator takes him from there to his office on the 26th floor.  He wakes at 5 o’clock most mornings, reads The New York Post, The New York Times and a handful of other newspapers, and tunes into the morning television news shows. In the final months of the campaign, he would hang around his apartment until about 10 a.m., joining his aides in the office later.  Mr. Trump’s affection for his penthouse apartment runs deep, as his biographer, Michael D’Antonio, learned when Mr. Trump invited him inside the three-story unit in 2014 for an extended interview.  Photo  Mr. Trump reveled in recalling the challenges required to design and build the apartment, decorated in 24-karat gold and marble in the Louis XIV style, saying he simply wanted to see if such an ambitious undertaking could be accomplished. He described it less as a home than a tribute to his own self-image.  “I really wanted to see if it could be done,” Mr. Trump said at the time, as he showed Mr. D’Antonio around the apartment. “This is a very complex unit. Building this unit, if you look at the columns and the carvings, this building, this unit was harder than building the building itself.”  Yet after meeting with President Obama on Thursday and touring the White House, Mr. Trump, according to two people briefed on his thinking, was taken with that building over all and marveled at the neoclassical architecture and history.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Returning home to Trump Tower from the White House may not be Mr. Trump’s only embrace of the familiar. His aides say he has also expressed interest in continuing to hold the large rallies that were a staple of his candidacy. He likes the instant gratification and adulation that the cheering crowds provide, and his aides are discussing how they might accommodate his demand.  “I think Trump has discovered that these rallies are tremendous opportunities for him to get his message out,” said Christopher Ruddy, chief executive of Newsmax Media, a conservative website. “It’s actually sort of old-fashioned, that you want to actually meet people and press the flesh with him.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Not least, Mr. Trump is finding Twitter a familiar comfort, although it is unclear if he will be the first president to wholly control his own Twitter account once he is in the White House. “I know they’re willing to be unorthodox and want to be true to themselves and not fall into a habit of let’s just follow precedent on what’s been done,” said Mike DuHaime, an adviser to Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who supported Mr. Trump shortly after ending his own White House bid and who stepped back as the head of the president-elect’s transition team on Friday.  Mr. Trump’s aides got him to agree to restrict his use of Twitter in the waning days of his campaign, but on Thursday, his second day as president-elect, Mr. Trump posted the kind of Twitter missive for which he has become known: a message complaining that “professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting.”  “Very unfair!” he wrote.  Mr. Trump checked himself later when he offered a more unifying message: “Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country. We will all come together and be proud.”  For now Mr. Trump remains in Trump Tower receiving congratulations, thanking those who stayed with him and venting to associates his lingering grievances with the news media over coverage of the campaign. He has stayed in touch with reporters at Fox News, checking in to ask about ratings and, as he has done for months, polling people about whom he should put in top jobs.  One constant is that the small cadre of aides and advisers who signed on with the campaign in its early, long-shot days will probably have jobs in the administration, should they want them. They have been told that all of the campaign staff will be taken care of.  “It was such a small operation and it’s such a big government, so it’s very natural they’re going to look to the people who went with them early and stuck with them through thick and thin,” Mr. DuHaime said.
But Mr. Obama’s place in history looks considerably different than a week ago. The transformation he envisioned may not survive his administration. He is leaving near the peak of his popularity, yet many of the voters who made Mr. Obama the nation’s first black president chose to replace him with a man who had peddled racially incendiary suggestions that he might not have been born in this country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In some ways, this follows a pattern: Americans grow weary of incumbent presidents and often pick successors perceived to be the opposite. John F. Kennedy was the vigorous young antidote to the aging Dwight D. Eisenhower. The cerebral Mr. Obama was the antithesis of the bring-‘em-on George W. Bush.  “My operative theory of presidential succession is people always choose the remedy to what they have; they never choose the replica — even when the incumbent is popular,” said David Axelrod, Mr. Obama’s longtime strategist.  Given that, aides argued that Mr. Trump’s election should not be viewed as a referendum on the president. “It was not a rejection of Obama or Obama-ism,” said Dan Pfeiffer, another former senior adviser. “It was probably more about the two candidates running in this election.”  Critics said there was no way to look at it as anything but a rebuff. “The election outcome is a clear repudiation of President Obama, his policies, his vision, how those policies will be implemented,” said Eric Cantor, the former House Republican majority leader. “And frankly, I think it reflects the fact that most Americans think he failed.”  Photo  Jay Winik, a historian who has studied presidents of the Civil War and World War II eras, said Mr. Obama would be remembered for helping the country move further beyond the ugly legacy of slavery and racism. “That said, it is hard not to think, from a historian’s point of view, Trump’s election changes our perspective on President Obama and his impact on the country, knocking him down a few pegs,” he said. “A huge swath of American people were hurting, the so-called forgotten American, and President Obama failed them.”  Mr. Obama could take solace from the fact that most Americans approve of his handling of the job in polls and more Americans voted for Mrs. Clinton than Mr. Trump, despite the Electoral College. Aides even interpreted the results as a validation of sorts for Mr. Obama, because Mr. Trump stood as the candidate of change, just as he had, albeit change of a different sort.  Indeed, Mr. Trump’s election imperils many of Mr. Obama policies, notably the health care law that has extended coverage to 20 million Americans but aggravated others who resented government intrusion and rising premiums. Mr. Trump has promised to scrap Mr. Obama’s international climate change agreement and Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact, renegotiate his Iran nuclear deal, dismantle Dodd-Frank regulations on Wall Street and reverse orders sparing millions of illegal immigrants from deportation.  But bold campaign rhetoric does not always translate into such clear-cut action. For instance, Mr. Eisenhower denounced Harry S. Truman’s foreign policy, only to largely adopt it after taking over. Along similar lines, Richard M. Nixon did not scrap Lyndon B. Johnson’s Great Society, and Mr. Obama ultimately preserved much of Mr. Bush’s counterterrorism program.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama’s team hopes Mr. Trump finds it harder to shift course than he expected. Taking health care away from millions of Americans might prove problematic, Mr. Obama’s advisers said. In recent days, Mr. Trump has said he will keep elements of the program and find a way to ensure that Americans do not lose coverage.  Moreover, although Mr. Obama said that all of his progress would go “out the window,” advisers now argue the opposite: that many accomplishments cannot be overturned. He will be remembered, they said, for pulling the country out of the Great Recession, saving the auto industry, bringing home most troops fighting overseas, killing Osama bin Laden, enacting higher fuel efficiency standards and restoring relations with Cuba.  Still, after two midterm defeats, this was the third time since taking office that voters rejected Mr. Obama’s advice. He campaigned all out for Mrs. Clinton as no departing incumbent has in modern times, only to relearn the lesson that presidents cannot transfer popularity.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  And there is no getting around the fact that Mr. Trump’s America is not Mr. Obama’s. He has said one of his biggest disappointments was failing to heal the country’s divisions. Polarization now seems worse than before.  Mr. Obama accepts only so much responsibility for that, faulting Republican obstructionism. He points to his early days in office, when he was heading to Capitol Hill to discuss the economic crisis only to hear that Representative John A. Boehner, the top House Republican, had already rejected the new president’s stimulus package out of hand.  “When I think about the polarization that occurred in 2009 and 2010, I’ve gone back and I’ve looked at my proposals and my speeches and the steps we took to reach out to Congress,” he told the historian Doris Kearns Goodwin in a pre-election conversation published by Vanity Fair. “And the notion that we weren’t engaging Congress or that we were overly partisan or we didn’t schmooze enough, or we didn’t reach out enough to Republicans — that whole narrative just isn’t true.”  Photo  Instead, he has pointed to Republican radicalization. “I see a straight line from the announcement of Sarah Palin as the vice-presidential nominee to what we see today in Donald Trump, the emergence of the Freedom Caucus, the Tea Party and the shift in the center of gravity for the Republican Party,” he told Jonathan Chait of New York magazine this fall.  Republicans, unsurprisingly, reject that narrative. Mr. Cantor, then Mr. Boehner’s No. 2, cited a now-famous White House meeting in those early days. In it, Mr. Cantor suggested his own economic measures only to be dismissed. “Eric, elections have consequences and I won,” he recalled the president saying.  “That was really the tenor of Obama’s Washington,” Mr. Cantor said. “It was much different from what the people heard him say on the trail. It was never really the vision that people were led to believe.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Cantor himself embodied the risks for Republicans perceived to be cooperating with Mr. Obama when he was ousted in a 2014 primary for not being conservative enough.  Mr. Obama does not talk publicly about the role of race in the opposition to him, but it is cited by many of his supporters. Republican intransigence must be explained at least in part by race, they figure — a refusal to accept the legitimacy of the first African-American president.  Yet lock-step opposition to Mr. Obama can also be explained by other factors, including political calculation and authentic philosophical disagreement. Mr. Obama’s opponents contend that he cites race to explain away valid criticism. His more virulent foes maintain that Mr. Obama is the one who fueled racial division.  Either way, Mr. Obama did not fully see the emerging threat. He dismissed Mr. Trump as a carnival barker and, like many in Washington, did not understand that much of the country was alienated enough to embrace such a figure.  To the president, Mr. Trump was a source of deep irritation for the racially charged accusation that he was not actually born in America. At the White House Correspondents Association dinner in 2011, Mr. Obama took revenge on Mr. Trump, mocking him and his reality show. (“You fired Gary Busey. And these are the kinds of decisions that would keep me up at night.”)  In talks beforehand, aides recalled no debate about going after Mr. Trump. He was, Mr. Axelrod said, “low-hanging fruit” for Mr. Obama. “I guarantee you that as he delivered those jokes he did not think he was roasting his successor,” he said. “I don’t think that would have remotely crossed his mind.”  David Litt, a former speechwriter for Mr. Obama, remembered thinking that evening that Mr. Trump had been destroyed politically, rendered a laughingstock. “That’s the end of Donald Trump,” he said he thought. Now the laughingstock holds the fate of Mr. Obama’s legacy in his hands.  “I think President Obama will still go down in history as a great and historic president,” Mr. Litt said. “But a lot of his accomplishments are going to be limited by what happened on Tuesday. There’s no getting around that.”
Mr. Christie will become a vice chairman of the transition effort, the campaign said.  The new inner circle at the transition offices will direct the activities of dozens of corporate consultants, lobbyists and other specialists who will be responsible for recommending candidates for agency jobs across the breadth of the federal government. Some of those advisers come from industries for which they are now in charge of finding top regulators.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The mission of our team will be clear: put together the most highly qualified group of successful leaders who will be able to implement our change agenda in Washington,” the transition team announced Friday afternoon.  The surprise moves will sideline Mr. Christie, who had been in charge of the transition for several months. After Mr. Christie dropped out of the Republican primary race, he became a staunch supporter of Mr. Trump. But his standing has fallen recently as two former aides were convicted in the scandal involving the closing of access lanes at the George Washington Bridge in 2013.  In a statement, Mr. Christie said that he is “proud to have run the pre-election phase of the transition team” and said that he looks forward to working with Mr. Pence. “I want to thank President-elect Trump for the opportunity to continue to help lead in this next phase,” Mr. Christie wrote.  Photo  Two people familiar with the reorganization discussion said Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, had wanted to marginalize Mr. Christie, who had come to recognize that he was not in the running to serve as a top adviser in Mr. Trump’s White House. It was unclear whether concerns about his ability to be confirmed might prevent him from being offered a cabinet post.  The changes will also push aside Richard H. Bagger, a former top aide to Mr. Christie who had been working on the transition. The transition team said Mr. Bagger will “return to the private sector” but will remain an adviser.  Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who has been a top campaign supporter, will also serve as vice chairmen of the transition, the transition team said Friday afternoon.  The 16-member advisory committee is made up of four women and 12 men. It will include several members of Congress; Rebekah Mercer, a top Republican donor; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; Peter Thiel, a founder of PayPal; Attorney General Pam Bondi of Florida; Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs executive; and Anthony Scaramucci, a hedge-fund manager and Trump supporter. Mr. Bannon will also serve on the committee. A political committee supporting Ms. Bondi received a $25,000 donation from the Trump Foundation, raising questions because it was around the time her office was reviewing allegations against Mr. Trump’s for-profit education programs.  “This team of experienced leaders will form the building blocks of our presidential transition team staff leadership roster, and will work with elected officials and tireless volunteers to prepare our government for the transfer of power on Jan. 20,” Mr. Pence said in a statement.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  There are some indications that the transition effort was slow to start, perhaps the result of Mr. Trump’s upset victory, which caught much of the political world by surprise. At least a few of the people helping organize the search for Mr. Trump were tapped at the last minute, while others have been preparing quietly for weeks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the Pentagon and the State Department, officials of the Obama administration said on Thursday that they had not yet heard from Mr. Trump’s transition team about beginning the complex work of transferring responsibilities and authority. A spokesman for the State Department said he did not have “any firm word” on when briefings might begin for designated officials from the new government.  Several people briefed on the transition process described it as somewhat chaotic after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday. His campaign was led by four leadership teams over 18 months, and most of those people were back in view on Thursday, including Corey Lewandowski, the campaign’s first manager. Mr. Lewandowski is said to have told people he would prefer a White House senior adviser role, although he has also been mentioned as a possible Republican National Committee chairman. Mr. Lewandowski resigned on Friday from his role as a CNN political commentator.  Photo  One thing is clear already: those helping Mr. Trump make the decisions are the members of his campaign’s inner circle. On Friday morning at Trump Tower in Manhattan, the president-elect’s closest aides arrived, one by one, waving to the press corps as they entered the elevators.  Trump Tower, the president-elect’s residence, has been transformed into a kind of fortress by the Secret Service and the New York police. The building has been ringed by Jersey barriers and concrete blocks marked with “NYPD.” The Secret Service has set up checkpoints on each end of 56th Street near the tower, and pedestrian access has been restricted around the building.  With just about 70 days left before the inauguration, Mr. Trump’s administration is largely being assembled behind the scenes. But like much else in the nation’s capital, little stays secret for long.  The list of names being mentioned as possibilities for crucial posts in Mr. Trump’s cabinet is growing by the hour, giving official Washington what it craves most: a never-ending parlor game as speculation grows about who might actually get a nod.  The latest to be swept into the speculation is Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, who was mentioned as a possible candidate for secretary of the Treasury by CNBC. Officials with the Trump transition team said they reached out informally to Mr. Dimon, who was clear he did not want the post.  Aides to Mr. Trump have declined to confirm who is on the short list for cabinet posts. And despite the president-elect’s return to Twitter on Thursday night, he has so far said nothing specific about his possible picks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The critical position of chief of staff — the gatekeeper for the president inside the West Wing — is expected to come down to a choice between Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus. The two men spent more than an hour in a meeting on Friday at Trump Tower.  Mr. Giuliani told CNN on Thursday that he might accept an appointment as attorney general, saying that “there’s probably nobody that knows the Justice Department better than me.”  Mr. Mnuchin, who served as Mr. Trump’s campaign finance chairman, is said to be a serious contender for Treasury secretary (though Carl Icahn, the investor, and Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, have also been mentioned in the news media).
Mr. Trump was swept to power in large part by white working-class voters who responded to his vow to restore the voices of forgotten people, ones drowned out by big business and Wall Street. But in his transition to power, some of the most prominent voices will be those of advisers who come from the same industries for which they are being asked to help set the regulatory groundwork.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The president-elect’s spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, declined a request for comment, as did nearly a dozen corporate executives, consultants and lobbyists serving on his transition team, which was outlined in a list distributed widely in Washington on Thursday.  A number of the people on that list are well-established experts with no clear interest in helping private-sector clients. But to critics of Mr. Trump — both Democrats and Republicans — the inclusion of advisers with industry ties is a first sign that he may not follow through on all of his promises.  “This whole idea that he was an outsider and going to destroy the political establishment and drain the swamp were the lines of a con man, and guess what — he is being exposed as just that,” said Peter Wehner, who served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush before becoming a speechwriter for George W. Bush. “He is failing the first test, and he should be held accountable for it.”  Transition teams help new presidents pick the new cabinet, as well as up to 4,000 political appointees who will take over top posts in agencies across the government. President Obama, after he was first elected, instituted rules that prohibited individuals who had served as registered lobbyists in the prior year from serving as transition advisers in the areas in which they represented private clients. They were also prohibited, after the administration took power, from lobbying in the parts of the government they helped set up.  “They wanted to make sure that people were not putting their thumb on the scale, or even the perception of that,” said Martha Joynt Kumar, the director of a nonprofit group called the White House Transition Project, which has studied two decades of presidential transitions.  Among the advisers assisting Mr. Trump who have no clear private-sector ties are Brian Johnson, a top lawyer for the House Financial Services Committee, who is helping to pick top staff members for the federal government’s many financial services agencies.  Edwin Meese III, who served as attorney general under Mr. Reagan and is now associated with the Heritage Foundation, the conservative think tank, is helping oversee management and budget issues, along with Kay Coles James, a Bush administration official who now runs an institute that trains future African-American leaders.  Former Representative Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan, who served as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and was once a special agent in the F.B.I., is overseeing issues related to national security, including the intelligence agencies and the Department of Homeland Security.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But in other areas, most notably the energy sector, the transition team advisers are far from independent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Catanzaro’s client list is a who’s who of major corporate players — such as the Hess Corporation and Devon Energy — that have tried to challenge the Obama administration’s environmental and energy policies on issues such as how much methane gas can be released at oil and gas drilling sites, lobbying disclosure reports show.  He also worked with oil industry players to help push through major legislation goals, such as allowing the export of crude oil. He will now help pick Mr. Trump’s energy team.  Michael McKenna, another lobbyist helping to pick key administration officials who will oversee energy policy, has a client list that this year has included the Southern Company, one of the most vocal critics of efforts to prevent climate change by putting limits on emissions from coal-burning power plants.  Advisers with ties to other industries include Martin Whitmer, who is overseeing “transportation and infrastructure” for the Trump transition. He is the chairman of a Washington law firm whose lobbying clients include the Association of American Railroads and the National Asphalt Pavement Association.  David Malpass, the former chief economist at Bear Stearns, the Wall Street investment bank that collapsed during the 2008 financial crisis, is overseeing the “economic issues” portfolio of the transition, as well as operations at the Treasury Department. Mr. Malpass now runs a firm called Encima Global, which sells economic research to institutional investors and corporate clients.  Mr. Eisenach, as a telecom industry consultant, has worked to help major cellular companies fight back against regulations proposed by the F.C.C. that would mandate so-called net neutrality — requiring providers to give equal access to their networks to outside companies. He is now helping to oversee the rebuilding of the staff at the F.C.C.  Dan DiMicco, a former chief executive of the steelmaking company Nucor, who now serves on the board of directors of Duke Energy, is heading the transition team for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. Mr. DiMicco has long argued that China is unfairly subsidizing its manufacturing sector at the expense of American jobs.  In his campaign, Mr. Trump promised to take steps to close the so-called revolving door, through which government officials leave their posts and then personally profit by helping private companies reap rewards from policies or programs they had recently managed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In October, declaring that “it’s time to drain the swamp in Washington,” he promised to institute a five-year ban in which all executive branch officials would be prevented from lobbying the government after they left. He has also promised to expand the definition of a lobbyist, so it includes corporate consultants who do not register as lobbyists but still often act like one.  Bruce F. Freed, the president of a nonprofit group called the Center for Political Accountability, which is pressing major corporations to be more transparent about their political spending, said Mr. Trump’s transition team had sent an unfortunate signal to his followers.  “This is one of the reasons you had such anger among voters — people rigging the system, gaming the system,” Mr. Freed said. “This represents more of the same.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — Vice President-elect Mike Pence made his name as a relentless conservative critic of the federal government. Soon he will essentially be running it.  Given the dearth of hands-on Washington experience in the inner circle of President-elect Donald J. Trump, Mr. Pence, a former Republican congressman, is emerging as a commanding figure in the administration taking shape as well as the chief conduit between Capitol Hill and the White House.  “My guess is he will be one of the most involved, day-to-day, managerial vice presidents in the history of the republic,” said Representative Jeb Hensarling, a senior Republican from Texas and a close ally from Mr. Pence’s days on Capitol Hill.  The announcement on Friday that Mr. Pence, who served 12 years in the House after his election in 2000, would be taking over management of the transition from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey was just more reassurance for top congressional Republicans who intend to rely heavily on him as their point man at the Trump White House. His selection as Mr. Trump’s running mate this summer calmed congressional Republicans jittery about the Trump candidacy.  Comparisons with Dick Cheney, considered a uniquely powerful No. 2 when he served with President George W. Bush, are already being made.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, said he had encouraged Mr. Pence to attend weekly party lunches in the Capitol just as Mr. Cheney did.  “We all really like Mike Pence,” Mr. McConnell said. “If you’ve asked any of us who’ve served with him, everybody likes him.”  To Washington Republicans, Mr. Pence is one of them, someone who can speak the argot of Congress and knows a C.R. (continuing resolution) from a C.B.O. score (Congressional Budget Office cost estimate).  “Trump had the vision and the passion and he understood about the forgotten man and woman,” Mr. Hensarling said. “Mike is a guy who can take that vision and passion and turn it into policy and then turn that policy into legislative language and then turn that language into bills that can reach the president’s desk.”  Mr. Pence also called Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, this week, but the two former congressional colleagues did little beyond exchange pleasantries and agree to meet in the future.  To Democrats, it is more than a little worrisome that Mr. Pence, a strong Christian conservative on social as well as fiscal issues, will be playing such a central role in the new administration.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Mike Pence is one of the most ideologically rigid individuals I’ve served with,” said Representative Steve Israel, a senior Democrat from New York, who is retiring. “Trump is putting the extreme right wing at the center of gravity in his administration, and that should be worrying to mainstream voters.”  Mr. Pence came to Congress as a rebel willing to challenge the priorities of his own party’s leadership. He was part of the leading edge of Tea Party-style Republicans eager to shake up Washington, but landed in the party leadership before leaving to run for governor of Indiana, a post that has provided him with government executive experience that could also prove valuable in his new role.  In the House, he was among the leaders of the effort to ban earmarks — spending sought by lawmakers for their home districts, popular at the time — and he was a strong advocate for cutting government spending over all. He opposed the expansion of Medicare to include prescription drug coverage — then a major priority of his party and the Bush White House. He led the Republican Study Committee, then the most conservative House Republicans, and was beaten badly in his first leadership race — a campaign that Mr. Hensarling notes he managed — before being elected to the No. 3 post of Republican Conference chairman in 2008.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As governor, Mr. Pence also instituted aspects of the Affordable Care Act in his state and accepted federal money to do so — a departure from how many other Republican governors responded to the new law. That experience could give him added expertise as the Republican Congress moves to dismantle the health program that is a signature of the Obama era and a top target of Mr. Trump’s.  Mr. Pence could also serve as a handy buffer between Mr. Trump and Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who clashed with Mr. Trump during the campaign but in recent weeks has sought to minimize any differences. In remarks after the election, Mr. Ryan has gone out of his way to note his close relationship and frequent contact with Mr. Pence.  “Mike Pence is a good man, a principled conservative, and he will make a great vice president,” Mr. Ryan told reporters this week.  Delegating significant authority to Mr. Pence jibes with Mr. Trump’s image as more of a chairman-of-the-board figure who leaves the details to others — and in Washington, there are a lot of details.  But Mr. Pence’s friends do not expect to him to push his role beyond what is expected, and they say he remains very deferential to Mr. Trump.  “Mike knows he was elected vice president, not president,” Mr. Hensarling said. “He knows who the boss is. Trump’s the boss.”  But in Washington, Mr. Pence is quickly coming to be seen as a highly empowered No. 2.
Photo  President-elect Donald J. Trump won the White House with an outsider’s populist promise to “drain the swamp” of Washington.  Now, as he prepares to assume the presidency, an open question remains about the capital he repeatedly spurned: Just how much is he willing to become a part of it?  Mr. Trump, a homebody who often flew several hours late at night during the campaign so he could wake up in his own bed in Trump Tower, is talking with his advisers about how many nights a week he will spend in the White House. He has told them he would like to do what he is used to, which is spending time in New York when he can.  The future first lady, Melania Trump, expects to move to Washington. But the couple’s 10-year-old son, Barron, is midway through a school year in New York, and it is unclear when the move would happen.  The questions reflect what Mr. Trump’s advisers described as the president-elect’s coming to grips with the fact that his life is about to change radically. They say that Mr. Trump, who was shocked when he won the election, might spend most of the week in Washington, much like members of Congress, and return to Trump Tower or his golf course in Bedminster, N.J., or his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach on weekends.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Hanging on to the familiar for presidents-elect and their families is not unusual. There were early questions about whether Michelle Obama would leave Chicago and move to the White House in early 2009 and disrupt her daughters’ school years, but the whole family moved in the day of the inaugural. Mr. Trump’s advisers hold out the possibility that the president-elect may spend more time in the White House as he grows less overwhelmed and more comfortable in the job.  Still, Mr. Trump has spent the last three decades, for the most part, cosseted within Trump Tower. His apartment is on the 58th floor, and a designated elevator takes him from there to his office on the 26th floor.  He wakes at 5 o’clock most mornings, reads The New York Post, The New York Times and a handful of other newspapers, and tunes into the morning television news shows. In the final months of the campaign, he would hang around his apartment until about 10 a.m., joining his aides in the office later.  Mr. Trump’s affection for his penthouse apartment runs deep, as his biographer, Michael D’Antonio, learned when Mr. Trump invited him inside the three-story unit in 2014 for an extended interview.  Photo  Mr. Trump reveled in recalling the challenges required to design and build the apartment, decorated in 24-karat gold and marble in the Louis XIV style, saying he simply wanted to see if such an ambitious undertaking could be accomplished. He described it less as a home than a tribute to his own self-image.  “I really wanted to see if it could be done,” Mr. Trump said at the time, as he showed Mr. D’Antonio around the apartment. “This is a very complex unit. Building this unit, if you look at the columns and the carvings, this building, this unit was harder than building the building itself.”  Yet after meeting with President Obama on Thursday and touring the White House, Mr. Trump, according to two people briefed on his thinking, was taken with that building over all and marveled at the neoclassical architecture and history.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Returning home to Trump Tower from the White House may not be Mr. Trump’s only embrace of the familiar. His aides say he has also expressed interest in continuing to hold the large rallies that were a staple of his candidacy. He likes the instant gratification and adulation that the cheering crowds provide, and his aides are discussing how they might accommodate his demand.  “I think Trump has discovered that these rallies are tremendous opportunities for him to get his message out,” said Christopher Ruddy, chief executive of Newsmax Media, a conservative website. “It’s actually sort of old-fashioned, that you want to actually meet people and press the flesh with him.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Not least, Mr. Trump is finding Twitter a familiar comfort, although it is unclear if he will be the first president to wholly control his own Twitter account once he is in the White House. “I know they’re willing to be unorthodox and want to be true to themselves and not fall into a habit of let’s just follow precedent on what’s been done,” said Mike DuHaime, an adviser to Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who supported Mr. Trump shortly after ending his own White House bid and who stepped back as the head of the president-elect’s transition team on Friday.  Mr. Trump’s aides got him to agree to restrict his use of Twitter in the waning days of his campaign, but on Thursday, his second day as president-elect, Mr. Trump posted the kind of Twitter missive for which he has become known: a message complaining that “professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting.”  “Very unfair!” he wrote.  Mr. Trump checked himself later when he offered a more unifying message: “Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country. We will all come together and be proud.”  For now Mr. Trump remains in Trump Tower receiving congratulations, thanking those who stayed with him and venting to associates his lingering grievances with the news media over coverage of the campaign. He has stayed in touch with reporters at Fox News, checking in to ask about ratings and, as he has done for months, polling people about whom he should put in top jobs.  One constant is that the small cadre of aides and advisers who signed on with the campaign in its early, long-shot days will probably have jobs in the administration, should they want them. They have been told that all of the campaign staff will be taken care of.  “It was such a small operation and it’s such a big government, so it’s very natural they’re going to look to the people who went with them early and stuck with them through thick and thin,” Mr. DuHaime said.
Photo  WASHINGTON — After his party’s brutal Election Day loss, Senator Chuck Schumer, the presumptive incoming Democratic minority leader, threw his support on Friday behind a liberal member of Congress to be the next chairman of the Democratic National Committee.  Mr. Schumer’s choice, Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota, is a favorite of the party’s left. Should he win the chairmanship, he would become one of the Democrats’ most visible spokesmen as the party seeks to regroup after losing the White House and an array of state-level offices to a populist wave fueled by white working-class voters.  The move signals the desire of Mr. Schumer to score early points with Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Bernie Sanders of Vermont, leaders from the party’s left. Mr. Schumer is likely to have to disappoint them at times in legislative battles after President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office as he seeks to protect endangered Democrats from Republican-leaning states who are up for re-election in 2018.  But Mr. Ellison, should he decide to run, will face some competition from Democrats who believe that the chairmanship should be a full-time job, not one that is split with the duties of being an elected official. Some Democrats also say they feel that the party should be run by someone who hails from an industrial state where the party has lost voters and support.  Others who are interested in the job include a former chairman, Howard Dean, a former governor of Vermont; Martin O’Malley, a former governor of Maryland; Raymond Buckley, the chairman of the New Hampshire Democratic Party; and Jaime R. Harrison, the chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “We have to do a better job of talking about not just equal rights for blacks and Latinos, but everybody,” Mr. Harrison said. “It doesn’t matter if you are a white person in West Virginia or a black person in South Carolina or New York City, we are fighting for each and every one of you.”  President Obama largely ignored the organization, charged with building the party’s foundation and electing Democrats to office, in favor of his own political group, Organizing for Action. The Democratic National Committee has been run since this summer by Donna Brazile after the previous leader, Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, stepped down after the leak of committee emails that portrayed her in an unflattering light.  “The infrastructure of the party is in shambles,” said Mo Elleithee, a Democratic strategist. “You need someone who is going to really roll up their sleeves and figure that piece out.”  Photo  Mr. Ellison, 53, has served in the House since 2007, representing greater Minneapolis. An African-American Muslim and the leader of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, he was an early supporter of Mr. Sanders and was among a relative handful of Democrats who took Mr. Trump’s prospects as a presidential candidate seriously from the beginning.  The central challenges for the next party chairman, Democrats say, include rebuilding the party’s ailing infrastructure and finding a way to excite voters. Of particular interest are those who backed Mr. Obama but did not support Hillary Clinton, and white working-class voters who have drifted to the Republicans.  “Without a Democratic White House, Schumer’s view is the D.N.C. is where grass-roots organizing in sync with legislative battles should be organized,” said Matt House, a spokesman for Mr. Schumer.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But Democrats may also find themselves in an ideological tangle that has knotted up both parties for the past several years. Progressives like Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren and Mr. Ellison could be at odds with more moderate Democrats, including a large number who face tough re-election fights in 2018 in the Senate.  “I really, really like Keith,” Ms. Warren said this week on MSNBC, speaking about Mr. Ellison. “And I think he’s terrific, and I think he would make a terrific D.N.C. chair.”  The chairman’s role is traditionally focused less on defining the party’s ideological stance than on fund-raising, providing the party with the technology and other tools it needs to be competitive and organizing at the grass-roots level.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The worst thing the party can do is have a big fight over whether the chairman should be a progressive or moderate,” Mr. Elleithee said. “We don’t live on that paradigm anymore, and this election proved it.”  Mr. O’Malley said he was considering seeking the job because “our party needs to rebuild.”  “We need to acknowledge that our message did not communicate credibly enough for a large number of Americans, and we need to do it urgently in a collaborative and inclusive way,” he said. “This is not what I expected to be doing. Given my background as well as my experience traveling the country, there are people who have called me and told me I should run.”  Mr. Dean, who has said he is “very interested” in the job, employed a so-called 50-state strategy when he was chairman in 2005, working to recruit in places Democrats have often failed to flourish. He said this week that his strategy ought to be employed again.
There has been weeping at West Wing staff meetings and a series of presidential pep talks, a tear-jerker of a Rose Garden gathering and anguished conversations about what will happen to President Obama’s legacy and the job prospects of his aides.  Since Donald J. Trump shocked both political parties and won the presidential election on Tuesday, a White House that had expected to spend the week celebrating a historic victory that would cement Mr. Obama’s most cherished initiatives for years to come is instead experiencing the seven stages of grief.  “It started with sadness and disbelief and definitely some tears around the building,” said one senior official who spoke on the condition of anonymity, unwilling to be quoted by name in detailing the crying or dwelling on the sense of loss hanging over the West Wing.  “Now it’s, ‘Let’s take a moment to digest,’ but also, ‘Let’s quickly pull ourselves up by our bootstraps because we need to continue to do our jobs,’” the official added.  A second senior official said she felt Hillary Clinton’s loss in her gut.  “I was actually physically ill for a while,” she said. “The only time I cried was when she came out and said, ‘I’m sorry,’” she added, referring to Mrs. Clinton’s concession speech on Wednesday in a hotel ballroom, when the candidate herself briefly teared up.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A cocktail party later that day for senior officials and cabinet members past and present felt “like sitting shiva,” one attendee said, referring to the weeklong Jewish mourning ritual in which friends and family grieve over a steady stream of refreshments.  Through it all, Mr. Obama has played the role of consoler in chief, pulling staff members into the Oval Office or dropping in on their meetings to buck them up, reassure them and tell them that this, too, shall pass.  Mr. Trump’s victory is a particularly bitter pill to swallow for the younger generation of aides in the White House, including many who had their first campaign experience as junior staff members on Mr. Obama’s improbable 2008 bid. They remember only one type of feeling the day after a presidential election: the euphoria of a history-making victory, coupled with a sense of invincibility from beating the odds.  This is the opposite of that.  In his private sympathy sessions, according to people who have attended, Mr. Obama has encouraged aides not to allow themselves to sink into despair.  “You don’t need hope when things are going well,” he tells them. “You need it when things are not going well.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The funereal air that hung over the White House in the first hours after Mr. Trump’s victory has given way to a more brave-faced solemnity, as Mr. Obama’s team turns its attention to ensuring a smooth transition to the next administration. His aides say they are determined not to appear bitter or petty at a moment when the president is trying to telegraph professionalism and grace.  But the truth is that they are all reeling, trying to process how they could have been so blindsided by Tuesday’s result, stung by the notion that the nation has just repudiated everything they have worked for, and wondering how different their lives will look from what they imagined a week ago.  “Everybody’s sort of recalibrating and regrouping,” said Kathleen Sebelius, the former secretary of health and human services, who attended Wednesday’s reception at the White House. Former officials flew to Washington from around the country to participate in what was supposed to be a celebration of Mrs. Clinton’s victory but felt more like a group therapy session, she said.  “It wasn’t quite a funeral — more like a memorial service,” she said. “It was a celebration of what we had done together, but with some ominous thoughts about what happens now.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama was upbeat, telling cabinet members how proud he was of the work they had done and the difference they had made for the good of the country.  “It was helpful to hear him talk about it and to share some time with one another,” Ms. Sebelius said. “We had a pretty amazing group of people who came to serve this president, and I think all of us felt good about that. Terrible about the election result, but good about that.”  Still, Mr. Obama’s efforts to accentuate the positive and the orderly passing of the baton are, in some sense, all the more jarring to members of his team who want nothing more than to hear him rail against Mr. Trump and all that he represents.  “Everyone who worked so hard on these issues is feeling an actual sense of loss and, because of the unexpected nature of this, like something was really yanked away from us,” said one former official who attended Wednesday’s party. “And now the president can’t be the voice for the Obama community at the time that it’s needed the most. It’s really disorienting.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — Before the election, it was clear that Democrats were looking at the very real prospect of scrapping the filibuster to keep Republicans from blocking the Supreme Court nominees of a President Hillary Clinton.  Now the tables are turned. It is the Republicans who will control the White House, Senate and House — the coveted Washington trifecta. And that raises a crucial question: If Democrats in the even more narrowly divided Senate embrace the filibuster to block what could be a flood of legislation, would Republicans respond by eliminating the 60-vote threshold in order to push their priorities through on simple majority votes?  In the afterglow of their election success, Republicans prefer not to discuss this unpleasant possibility. They would rather rhapsodize about a sunny legislative future in which the two parties work in harmony, negating the need for all those troublesome Senate cloture votes to try to break filibusters (a tactic that they, in fact, employed very effectively to stymie President Obama).  “I think what the American people are looking for is results,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who will retain his majority leader title by virtue of surprising Republican victories, told reporters. “And to get results in the Senate, as all of you know, it requires some Democratic participation and cooperation.”  At the same time, Mr. McConnell said that repealing the Affordable Care Act was a “pretty high item on our agenda,” and he predicted quick action. “The sooner we can go in a different direction, the better,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Democrats are certain to oppose that. Even if some red-state Democrats up for re-election in 2018 join Republicans, the repeal effort will most likely remain short of the 60 votes now needed.  Republicans can use a special process known as reconciliation to avoid a filibuster. But that effort would take well into 2017 and would require passage of a congressional budget resolution, among other steps.  Presumably, the newly installed president, Donald J. Trump, along with eager House Republicans and impatient legions of Trump supporters, would want to see the law repealed well before then, and they could apply enough pressure to lead to the filibuster’s demise.  Another development could spur a filibuster fight even sooner. Mr. Trump is likely to move quickly to fill the Supreme Court seat that Senate Republicans have kept empty for more than eight months.  Senate Democrats say they hope that Mr. Trump follows tradition by consulting with them on his Supreme Court choice, and that he picks a nominee both parties are able to support. But they remain very unhappy about how Republicans treated Merrick B. Garland, the highly regarded federal appeals court judge whose nomination by Mr. Obama in March is now dead.  Democrats may want some payback. So if Mr. Trump picks a conservative whom Democrats find objectionable, it is possible that they will do whatever they can to impede the choice, including a filibuster.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That could lead to a retaliatory move by Republicans to eliminate the filibuster against Supreme Court nominees, the only judicial candidates exempted from a change Democrats engineered in 2013 that allowed filibusters against nominees to be broken by a simple majority vote.  Mr. McConnell would not tip his hand this week on how he would respond to such a Democratic approach. But he did not rule out the so-called nuclear option: changing rules via a procedural vote on the floor instead of the 67 votes officially required.  “I would not anticipate any particular strategy that the Democrats might employ to defeat it or what we might do in reaction to that,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. McConnell is what is known on Capitol Hill as an institutionalist, a strong believer in the traditions and practices of the Senate. He was very critical of the decision by Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, who is retiring this year, to rally his party into limiting filibusters against nominees in response to Republican delaying tactics.  Mr. McConnell has said repeatedly that it is crucial to American democracy to respect the special rights of the minority party in the Senate, and that it would be a mistake to limit the filibuster, since the decision could backfire if his party fell out of power.  “I don’t think we should act as if we’re going to be in the majority forever,” he said.  It is not clear that Mr. McConnell, even if he wanted to, could round up enough votes from his own party to curtail the Senate filibuster, since some veteran Republican senators such as Susan Collins of Maine would probably be opposed.  However, if Senate Democrats were able to frustrate the unified Republican government through the filibuster, the forces behind Mr. Trump’s election and agenda — among his top priorities are major tax cuts and tough border security measures — would be likely to push Mr. McConnell and his colleagues to get rid of it.  House conservatives and other top Republicans were already agitating for an end to the filibuster last year, and that was when Mr. Obama was still certain to veto bills he opposed.  In addition, the 2018 electoral landscape is so favorable to Republicans that they are very likely to retain power for the entire four years of Mr. Trump’s term, giving them a huge opening to rewrite the federal statute book if left unimpeded.  Mr. McConnell loves the Senate rules and would be loath to change them. But he did not reverse the Democrats and restore the 60-vote threshold on most nominees when the Republicans took control in 2015. He might ultimately be persuaded to scuttle the filibuster on Supreme Court nominees and even on legislation if he felt it was justified and the time was right.
“It is unprecedented in modern history to have the level of complexity of global substantial business relationships that the president-elect has, and the litigation that inevitably follows any complex global business venture,” said Norman L. Eisen, a former special counsel for ethics and government reform under President Obama, who supported Mr. Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton. “It will be complicated, but not insurmountable.”  Photo  Mr. Trump faces potential conflicts on multiple fronts. He has income streams that could be affected by taxation policies he may try to get through Congress. His companies have hundreds of millions of dollars of debt from banks regulated by the federal government. In one case, Mr. Trump is a part owner of an office building in Manhattan that carries a $950 million loan from lenders that include the Bank of China.  A key source of his revenue is the licensing of the Trump name, both domestically and abroad, and the value of that brand could be helped, or harmed, by actions he takes or does not take.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Trump Organization said it had begun the process of “vetting various structures,” with a goal of quickly transferring the businesses to three of Mr. Trump’s children — Donald Jr., Ivanka and Eric — along with executives. “This is a top priority at the Organization and the structure that is ultimately selected will comply with all applicable rules and regulations,” Amanda Miller, a marketing executive for the company, wrote in an email.  During a debate in January, Mr. Trump said he would put his holdings in a blind trust, an arrangement in which a public official lets a financial manager control his wealth and does not know exactly how the money is invested. But in the next breath, he acknowledged the problem with that strategy: “Well, I don’t know if it’s a blind trust if Ivanka, Don and Eric run it.”  In an interview, Alan Garten, a lawyer for the Trump Organization, spoke of the difficulty of the task. “There has been a huge event — a historic event — that has occurred,” he said. “There is no question that makes my job more complicated.”  Under federal laws, executive branch employees must comply with conflict-of-interest rules that guard against being influenced by personal investments, and they must curb payments from sources outside the government. As a result, employees may have to recuse themselves from working on matters where they may have conflicts, holding certain properties or accepting money. For example, when Henry Paulson, the former Goldman Sachs executive, became Treasury secretary in 2006, he pledged to sell about $470 million in company stock to comply with conflict-of-interest rules.  Photo  But the president and vice president were exempted from such laws, on the theory that they needed to be able to carry out their constitutional duties without restraint. So President Trump will be able to take actions pertaining to another country even if he has business interests there.  Federal laws like those against bribery and receiving benefits from foreign countries still apply to the president. Enforcement would fall to the Justice Department or to Congress, which could pursue criminal or impeachment proceedings if evidence suggests laws were broken.  Mr. Trump will be required next year to file an updated personal financial disclosure listing his holdings, similar to the forms he has filed the past couple of years as a candidate. But Mr. Trump will not be required to make public his income tax returns, which he declined to do during the campaign, citing a continuing audit by the Internal Revenue Service, an agency he will now control. If he did release them, the tax returns could provide transparency into his international business dealings and other potential conflicts that may arise.  As president, Mr. Trump will have no protection from lawsuits related to his life outside the White House, a result of the 1997 Supreme Court ruling that President Clinton could be sued by Ms. Jones in a sexual harassment case that dated to his time as Arkansas’s governor. That litigation, which ended in an $850,000 settlement but no admission of wrongdoing, preoccupied Mr. Clinton in his second term and indirectly led to his impeachment.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  That ruling could set a trap for Mr. Trump — who has been accused by several women of unwanted advances, though none are currently suing him — and present a strategy for his political opponents to hamper his administration with litigation, legal experts said.  “I anticipate that is going to be one of the first line of attacks against President Trump,” said Richard W. Painter, the chief White House ethics lawyer under President George W. Bush from 2005 to 2007, who endorsed Mrs. Clinton. “It is potentially very destructive for the country as it was with Clinton.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  On Thursday, as Mr. Trump was in Washington meeting with President Obama and congressional leaders, his lawyers were in court in San Diego for a lengthy hearing related to the Trump University lawsuit, in which former students allege they were cheated out of thousands of dollars in tuition through deceptive promises and high-pressure sales tactics.  Mr. Trump has rejected the allegations. But on Thursday, one of his lawyers, Daniel Petrocelli, told the judge, Gonzalo P. Curiel — whom Mr. Trump accused of bias because of his Mexican heritage — that he was open to discussing a settlement in the case.  Mr. Petrocelli also said he might request to delay the trial to next year, saying more time was necessary because “we’re in uncharted territories” in light of Mr. Trump’s election, The Associated Press reported. Trump University is also the subject of a lawsuit by the New York attorney general. That case will also continue.  Mr. Trump and his businesses are enmeshed in myriad other litigation. Mr. Trump has been engaged in a lengthy dispute with Palm Beach County over jetliners flying over his Mar-a-Lago resort on the way to and from the nearby airport. In a lawsuit, he claimed that the noise, vibrations and emissions from the aircraft are disruptive to guests and damaging the property, including the Dorian stone and antique Cuban roof tiles.  And in Washington, Mr. Trump has sued two celebrity chefs, Geoffrey Zakarian and José Andrés, after they backed out of restaurant deals at his new hotel development at the Old Post Office Pavilion after he made incendiary comments last year about Mexican immigrants.  The Old Post Office project itself is a potential conflict. The Trump Organization signed a 60-year deal with the federal government to redevelop and manage the building as a hotel — meaning that he will be, in a sense, his own landlord.
“Anybody who watches the news knows we need to have law and order reinstalled and we need to have more support for Blue Lives Matter,” she said, referring to the pro-police slogan that became a retort to the protests.  Photo  In recent interviews, other supporters of Mr. Trump have said they want him to institute curfews in city neighborhoods and to increase funding to drug treatment programs. They also expressed approval for widespread use of stop-and-frisk, the police practice of stopping and sometimes searching people in high-crime areas.  While supporters of the practice say it helps officers find illegal weapons and bring down homicide rates, it became a source of enormous tension between the police and black residents in the cities that deployed it. A federal judge in New York struck down the tactic as unconstitutional in 2013, saying the way the city was using it violated the rights of minorities. But if it were ever reinstated, it could one day land in front of a Supreme Court with Trump appointees who could be more open to its use.  “Donald Trump has proposed nothing short of a police state,” said Brittany Packnett, an activist who served on President Obama’s task force on 21st-century policing. “This is backlash to a black president, a black movement and black people being self-determined, bold and unapologetic.”  Mr. Trump’s ability to impose stop-and-frisk, should he follow through on his campaign talk, would be limited by the fact that local police and sheriff’s departments control most aspects of law enforcement. His administration could conceivably use grants to encourage local departments to adopt his policies, much in the way that President Bill Clinton’s Justice Department handed out money to encourage the hiring of tens of thousands of new officers around the country.  Mr. Trump’s Justice Department will have another pressing policy matter: how aggressively to pursue investigations against the police.  Under Mr. Obama, the department has often taken the lead on police violence cases, sometimes looking into prosecuting officers on charges of civil rights violations after local prosecutors declined to charge them or juries declined to convict. The department has in the last couple of years demanded changes from a number of police departments, including in Ferguson, Mo., where it found that officers were violating the constitutional rights of black residents, and in Cleveland, where it found a pattern of “unreasonable and unnecessary use of force” that resulted in dangerous and reckless behavior by officers. Both inquiries came after black residents were killed by local officers.  “What role does he see for his Justice Department in dealing with use-of-force issues, pattern and practice investigations, and the overall role of the Justice Department vis-à-vis local law enforcement?” Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, said of Mr. Trump. “We really don’t know yet.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  One of the first issues Mr. Trump’s Justice Department is likely to have to deal with is the case of Mr. Garner, whose dying words, “I can’t breathe,” became a nationwide rallying cry. In December 2014, a state grand jury in Staten Island decided not to bring charges against Officer Daniel Pantaleo, who was seen on a video using a chokehold, prohibited by the New York Police Department, to subdue Mr. Garner.  Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch recently replaced the New York team of federal agents and lawyers investigating the case, who were leaning against filing charges against the officers involved, a move that struck some as political.  On Tuesday night as defeat set in, Ms. Carr began writing a letter to Ms. Lynch pleading with her to quickly decide how to proceed before Mr. Trump takes office.  “Please hear my cry, don’t allow my son’s words and our tears to be in vain,” Ms. Carr wrote before sending it off Friday morning. “I’ve been living in a nightmare and crying for over two years and I’m ready to awake to peace.”  In an interview, Ms. Carr added that she felt new pressure to get the case resolved. “I know my son’s case is on the line, and if it goes past Obama’s administration, we are not going to get any justice,” she said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  William Bateman, 52, who voted for Mr. Trump and works as an operations manager in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, sees things differently. He felt that the Justice Department, under Mr. Obama’s direction, “politicized everything,” and that the president was unfair to the police by “blaming them before they went to trial.”  He also said he believed a constant theme of Mr. Obama’s tenure was a sentiment of exclusion, beginning when the president weighed in on the 2012 shooting death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin by a neighborhood watch volunteer in Sanford, Fla. “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon,” Mr. Obama said then.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It was like he was defending the black community, the Muslim community, the Hispanic community,” Mr. Bateman said this week. “But not the white community.”  The feeling that Mr. Obama was taking sides reverberated around the country and was part of the reason the National Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Mr. Trump, said Jim Pasco, its executive director. Many saw parallels between Mr. Trump’s law-and-order pledge and Richard M. Nixon’s 1968 campaign that became a reaction to the national strife over the Vietnam War, the Voting Rights Act, the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, and widespread rioting.  “The atmosphere has gotten harder for police officers because there is a lot of second-guessing by people with a lack of insight into their jobs and a lack of expertise on what constitutes appropriate policing techniques in given situations,” Mr. Pasco said, adding that officers hoped that Mr. Trump would change the nation’s view of policing.  But if the election of Mr. Trump was a counterprotest against Black Lives Matter, there were no signs that protest leaders planned to turn down the volume. Activists like Charlene Carruthers, the national director of Black Youth Project 100, said this week that they were reeling from Mr. Trump’s election and were preparing to strongly oppose his policies.  “We are now facing a presidential administration that not only does not value black people’s lives,” Ms. Carruthers said, “but will promote and support policies that will actively make our lives worse and kill more people.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Obama administration is negotiating with Malaysia over a deal to repatriate and continue to incarcerate a Guantánamo Bay detainee accused of being an accessory to two major terrorist attacks in Indonesia, officials said.  While challenges remain, the prospective deal is important because it could set up a way to prosecute the detainee and two others, including an Indonesian man best known as Hambali, who is accused of masterminding the two attacks. They are among the 30 men who have been held in indefinite wartime detention without charges for over a decade and who are still deemed too dangerous to release.  The high-level talks also have broader importance for the future of the United States’ security cooperation and relationship with Malaysia. They are being held amid tensions over China’s efforts to assert greater control over the South China Sea and over a scandal involving Malaysia’s prime minister, whom the Justice Department recently accused in a civil complaint of playing a role in a billion-dollar corruption scheme.  Early this month, the State and Defense Department envoys for closing Guantánamo, Lee Wolosky and Paul Lewis, and the chief prosecutor of the military commissions system, Brig. Gen. Mark Martins, flew to Malaysia. They met on Nov. 2 with the Malaysian deputy prime minister and other top Malaysian officials to discuss the potential deal, officials said.  The talks center on a Malaysian detainee at Guantánamo, Mohd Farik Bin Amin, better known as Zubair. Along with another Malaysian detainee, Mohammed Nazir Bin Lep, who is often called Lillie, Mr. Zubair is accused of helping Mr. Hambali evade arrest after the 2002 nightclub bombings in Bali and of moving funds later used to finance the 2003 Marriott Hotel bombing in Jakarta. (Mr. Hambali is also named Riduan Isamuddin.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The idea is that Mr. Zubair would plead guilty to terrorism offenses before an American military commission and agree to testify against Mr. Lillie and Mr. Hambali. If he lives up to that promise and serves about four more years in United States custody, Mr. Zubair would be repatriated to Malaysia to serve the remainder of his sentence.  The Obama administration declined to comment on the deliberations. The officials who described them spoke on the condition of anonymity because the deal is not public or final. Lawyers for Mr. Hambali and Mr. Lillie said they had heard rumors of movement but had no details.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Last year, Mr. Zubair had been close to agreeing to a similar plea deal in the military commissions system, according to the officials and to his defense lawyer, Mark Denbeaux, who provided The New York Times with a copy of a charge sheet that prosecutors had drafted for those talks. But the deal collapsed after Malaysia’s attorney general at the time suggested that Malaysian law might not permit carrying out a sentence imposed by the tribunal, they said.  There is a new attorney general in Malaysia, and there appears to be greater high-level political will for Malaysia to take back its two nationals at Guantánamo.  The talks have also explored whether Mr. Zubair might plead guilty both to military commission charges and — via videoconference link from Cuba — to domestic criminal offenses in Malaysia, potentially bolstering Malaysia’s domestic legal authority to keep imprisoning him after a transfer.  The Malaysian government wants to get back Mr. Lillie as well, and the American government wants to convict him — either through a plea or by trial with help from Mr. Zubair’s testimony. But its ultimate goal is to use testimony from one or both of them to win a conviction against Mr. Hambali. The Bali bombings killed 202 people, including seven Americans; the Jakarta bombing killed at least 11 people and wounded about 140 more.  Mr. Denbeaux said he had not yet discussed any new plea deal with Mr. Zubair. But he cautioned that while his client wanted to go home, their hope during the talks last year was that Malaysian courts might grant him some credit for the 13 years he has spent in custody, despite rules in the military commissions system that bar crediting time served toward a sentence.  “I can’t say whether he’d take a deal,” Mr. Denbeaux said. “He wants to go back. It’s just a question of what the terms are. He doesn’t want Malaysia to become Guantánamo 2.0.”
Mr. Christie will become a vice chairman of the transition effort, the campaign said.  The new inner circle at the transition offices will direct the activities of dozens of corporate consultants, lobbyists and other specialists who will be responsible for recommending candidates for agency jobs across the breadth of the federal government. Some of those advisers come from industries for which they are now in charge of finding top regulators.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The mission of our team will be clear: put together the most highly qualified group of successful leaders who will be able to implement our change agenda in Washington,” the transition team announced Friday afternoon.  The surprise moves will sideline Mr. Christie, who had been in charge of the transition for several months. After Mr. Christie dropped out of the Republican primary race, he became a staunch supporter of Mr. Trump. But his standing has fallen recently as two former aides were convicted in the scandal involving the closing of access lanes at the George Washington Bridge in 2013.  In a statement, Mr. Christie said that he is “proud to have run the pre-election phase of the transition team” and said that he looks forward to working with Mr. Pence. “I want to thank President-elect Trump for the opportunity to continue to help lead in this next phase,” Mr. Christie wrote.  Photo  Two people familiar with the reorganization discussion said Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, had wanted to marginalize Mr. Christie, who had come to recognize that he was not in the running to serve as a top adviser in Mr. Trump’s White House. It was unclear whether concerns about his ability to be confirmed might prevent him from being offered a cabinet post.  The changes will also push aside Richard H. Bagger, a former top aide to Mr. Christie who had been working on the transition. The transition team said Mr. Bagger will “return to the private sector” but will remain an adviser.  Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who has been a top campaign supporter, will also serve as vice chairmen of the transition, the transition team said Friday afternoon.  The 16-member advisory committee is made up of four women and 12 men. It will include several members of Congress; Rebekah Mercer, a top Republican donor; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; Peter Thiel, a founder of PayPal; Attorney General Pam Bondi of Florida; Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs executive; and Anthony Scaramucci, a hedge-fund manager and Trump supporter. Mr. Bannon will also serve on the committee. A political committee supporting Ms. Bondi received a $25,000 donation from the Trump Foundation, raising questions because it was around the time her office was reviewing allegations against Mr. Trump’s for-profit education programs.  “This team of experienced leaders will form the building blocks of our presidential transition team staff leadership roster, and will work with elected officials and tireless volunteers to prepare our government for the transfer of power on Jan. 20,” Mr. Pence said in a statement.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  There are some indications that the transition effort was slow to start, perhaps the result of Mr. Trump’s upset victory, which caught much of the political world by surprise. At least a few of the people helping organize the search for Mr. Trump were tapped at the last minute, while others have been preparing quietly for weeks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the Pentagon and the State Department, officials of the Obama administration said on Thursday that they had not yet heard from Mr. Trump’s transition team about beginning the complex work of transferring responsibilities and authority. A spokesman for the State Department said he did not have “any firm word” on when briefings might begin for designated officials from the new government.  Several people briefed on the transition process described it as somewhat chaotic after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday. His campaign was led by four leadership teams over 18 months, and most of those people were back in view on Thursday, including Corey Lewandowski, the campaign’s first manager. Mr. Lewandowski is said to have told people he would prefer a White House senior adviser role, although he has also been mentioned as a possible Republican National Committee chairman. Mr. Lewandowski resigned on Friday from his role as a CNN political commentator.  Photo  One thing is clear already: those helping Mr. Trump make the decisions are the members of his campaign’s inner circle. On Friday morning at Trump Tower in Manhattan, the president-elect’s closest aides arrived, one by one, waving to the press corps as they entered the elevators.  Trump Tower, the president-elect’s residence, has been transformed into a kind of fortress by the Secret Service and the New York police. The building has been ringed by Jersey barriers and concrete blocks marked with “NYPD.” The Secret Service has set up checkpoints on each end of 56th Street near the tower, and pedestrian access has been restricted around the building.  With just about 70 days left before the inauguration, Mr. Trump’s administration is largely being assembled behind the scenes. But like much else in the nation’s capital, little stays secret for long.  The list of names being mentioned as possibilities for crucial posts in Mr. Trump’s cabinet is growing by the hour, giving official Washington what it craves most: a never-ending parlor game as speculation grows about who might actually get a nod.  The latest to be swept into the speculation is Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, who was mentioned as a possible candidate for secretary of the Treasury by CNBC. Officials with the Trump transition team said they reached out informally to Mr. Dimon, who was clear he did not want the post.  Aides to Mr. Trump have declined to confirm who is on the short list for cabinet posts. And despite the president-elect’s return to Twitter on Thursday night, he has so far said nothing specific about his possible picks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The critical position of chief of staff — the gatekeeper for the president inside the West Wing — is expected to come down to a choice between Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus. The two men spent more than an hour in a meeting on Friday at Trump Tower.  Mr. Giuliani told CNN on Thursday that he might accept an appointment as attorney general, saying that “there’s probably nobody that knows the Justice Department better than me.”  Mr. Mnuchin, who served as Mr. Trump’s campaign finance chairman, is said to be a serious contender for Treasury secretary (though Carl Icahn, the investor, and Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, have also been mentioned in the news media).
The headline example is Wisconsin, where a Republican-backed law requiring voters to produce one of a limited number of acceptable photo IDs was in effect for the first time. Studies show — and some Republicans admit — that such laws disproportionately reduce Democratic turnout because many of the laws require IDs that low-income and immigrant voters, who are often Democrats, frequently lack.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Milwaukee, where turnout dropped 41,000 votes from the 2012 total, the chief elections official said on Friday that declines in voting were greatest in areas where lack of IDs was most common. Donald J. Trump won Wisconsin by about 27,000 votes.  No conclusion can be drawn on the impact of the ID requirement until voting data is analyzed, said Nicholas Stephanopoulos, a law professor at the University of Chicago and an election law expert. But “it’s at least a reasonable hypothesis that voting restrictions made a major difference in places like Wisconsin,” he said.  Others said they remained skeptical until election data could be sifted. Some of the strictest voter-identification laws that Republican legislatures had enacted were struck down by courts before balloting began, they noted, and support for Hillary Clinton declined across the board from 2012 levels, not just in states with stricter voter ID requirements.  “With their election debacle, Democrats are looking for a scapegoat,” said Richard L. Hasen, a law professor at the University of California, Irvine, and a leading election scholar. “And as much as I am upset with the efforts of Republican legislatures to make it harder to register and vote, I don’t think that’s the primary explanation for the Democrats’ failure at the top of the ticket.”  There is nevertheless broad agreement that the electoral system failed large numbers of would-be voters this year, and substantial doubt that many of those failings will be remedied anytime soon.  Detailed autopsies of Tuesday’s vote will not be available for weeks. But not counting the effects of politically driven voter suppression, experts believe about one million votes are not cast or are thrown out in an average presidential election through no fault of the voter, said Charles Stewart III, a political science professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Stewart is a member of the Caltech/M.I.T. Voting Technology Project, which researches election administration.  Some of those lost votes resulted from electronic or mechanical lapses that misread or lost ballots. But other factors are also at work. Estimates of the number of voters who were deterred by long lines and lengthy waits ranged as high as 730,000 in 2012, and a study by the Ohio State University and The Orlando Sentinel estimated that 200,000 people left lines in Florida alone that year.  Photo  Tuesday’s election brought long lines to a number of crucial states, including Ohio, North Carolina and Pennsylvania. Computer failures in Colorado, North Carolina and elsewhere caused delays in casting votes; in Durham, N.C., a breakdown of electronic voter registration rolls caused huge delays, witnesses said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  About 250,000 of the 26.8 million absentee ballots cast in 2012 were thrown out because voters failed to follow often arcane instructions on filling in and sealing their vote. One in six of the thrown-out votes that year was tossed because a ballot signature was deemed to not match those on registration documents, a flaw most experts attribute to mistakes or handwriting changes, not fraud.  Tuesday’s election likely saw a surge in provisional ballots — those cast but held in abeyance until their eligibility can be verified — as election-law changes in some states left voters and poll workers alike confused about requirements. Some of those ballots will not be counted because voters failed to follow up after the election to correct some deficiency, like the lack of a required ID card.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Voters see the outcome and think, ‘My vote won’t matter,’” said Barry C. Burden, the director of the Elections Research Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. “And even if the voter wants his vote to count, it’s still a hassle. You have to take another step that other voters don’t have to.”  Some of those shortcomings could be addressed before the next presidential balloting. After the 2012 election, a presidential task force recommended that states replace voting machines that were purchased after the disputed 2000 vote, which are nearing the end of their useful life.  One early test is whether Congress will allot money for that upgrade, a task that is far down the list of priorities for cash-strapped states and localities. That could reduce both the number of lost and misread ballots and the long lines caused by equipment failures.  But the outlook for perhaps the most significant change — removing the political and bureaucratic obstacles that dilute the vote — is decidedly more mixed in the wake of this week’s Republican sweep of power.  Voting rights advocates persuaded federal appeals courts to strike down restrictive laws in North Carolina, Texas and elsewhere as violations of both the Constitution and what remains of the Voting Rights Act. Those suits are now headed to the Supreme Court, where they are far more likely to be struck down if Mr. Trump nominates a conservative justice to fill the seat left by Antonin Scalia.  Still, those who anticipate a rollback of voting rights protections may be mistaken, said Edward B. Foley, a law professor and director of the election law project at Ohio State University. In recent rulings, even conservative judges have drawn the line at voter ID requirements and other restrictions that were clearly discriminatory, he said, and new academic studies have done far more to document the effects of those restrictions than in the past.  “I don’t think the sky is going to completely fall on voting rights,” Professor Foley said. “My instinct is that the system is going to essentially protect voters from outright disenfranchisement.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  What many elections experts call the most important objective — making it easier to register to vote — has gained momentum as states have moved toward online registration. This year, Vermont, West Virginia, Connecticut and Alaska joined Oregon in approving automatic voter registration, in which residents are enrolled to vote whenever they interact with a government agency, unless they opt out.  But further expanding the rolls will be difficult, experts say, because registration has also become a partisan issue. Many Republicans are both ideologically and politically against a change that not only removes patriotic impetus to sign up to vote, but that they believe will help expand the Democratic base more than their own.  Are they right?  “I don’t know,” Professor Hasen said. “But it certainly helps voters.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Obama administration is negotiating with Malaysia over a deal to repatriate and continue to incarcerate a Guantánamo Bay detainee accused of being an accessory to two major terrorist attacks in Indonesia, officials said.  While challenges remain, the prospective deal is important because it could set up a way to prosecute the detainee and two others, including an Indonesian man best known as Hambali, who is accused of masterminding the two attacks. They are among the 30 men who have been held in indefinite wartime detention without charges for over a decade and who are still deemed too dangerous to release.  The high-level talks also have broader importance for the future of the United States’ security cooperation and relationship with Malaysia. They are being held amid tensions over China’s efforts to assert greater control over the South China Sea and over a scandal involving Malaysia’s prime minister, whom the Justice Department recently accused in a civil complaint of playing a role in a billion-dollar corruption scheme.  Early this month, the State and Defense Department envoys for closing Guantánamo, Lee Wolosky and Paul Lewis, and the chief prosecutor of the military commissions system, Brig. Gen. Mark Martins, flew to Malaysia. They met on Nov. 2 with the Malaysian deputy prime minister and other top Malaysian officials to discuss the potential deal, officials said.  The talks center on a Malaysian detainee at Guantánamo, Mohd Farik Bin Amin, better known as Zubair. Along with another Malaysian detainee, Mohammed Nazir Bin Lep, who is often called Lillie, Mr. Zubair is accused of helping Mr. Hambali evade arrest after the 2002 nightclub bombings in Bali and of moving funds later used to finance the 2003 Marriott Hotel bombing in Jakarta. (Mr. Hambali is also named Riduan Isamuddin.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The idea is that Mr. Zubair would plead guilty to terrorism offenses before an American military commission and agree to testify against Mr. Lillie and Mr. Hambali. If he lives up to that promise and serves about four more years in United States custody, Mr. Zubair would be repatriated to Malaysia to serve the remainder of his sentence.  The Obama administration declined to comment on the deliberations. The officials who described them spoke on the condition of anonymity because the deal is not public or final. Lawyers for Mr. Hambali and Mr. Lillie said they had heard rumors of movement but had no details.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Last year, Mr. Zubair had been close to agreeing to a similar plea deal in the military commissions system, according to the officials and to his defense lawyer, Mark Denbeaux, who provided The New York Times with a copy of a charge sheet that prosecutors had drafted for those talks. But the deal collapsed after Malaysia’s attorney general at the time suggested that Malaysian law might not permit carrying out a sentence imposed by the tribunal, they said.  There is a new attorney general in Malaysia, and there appears to be greater high-level political will for Malaysia to take back its two nationals at Guantánamo.  The talks have also explored whether Mr. Zubair might plead guilty both to military commission charges and — via videoconference link from Cuba — to domestic criminal offenses in Malaysia, potentially bolstering Malaysia’s domestic legal authority to keep imprisoning him after a transfer.  The Malaysian government wants to get back Mr. Lillie as well, and the American government wants to convict him — either through a plea or by trial with help from Mr. Zubair’s testimony. But its ultimate goal is to use testimony from one or both of them to win a conviction against Mr. Hambali. The Bali bombings killed 202 people, including seven Americans; the Jakarta bombing killed at least 11 people and wounded about 140 more.  Mr. Denbeaux said he had not yet discussed any new plea deal with Mr. Zubair. But he cautioned that while his client wanted to go home, their hope during the talks last year was that Malaysian courts might grant him some credit for the 13 years he has spent in custody, despite rules in the military commissions system that bar crediting time served toward a sentence.  “I can’t say whether he’d take a deal,” Mr. Denbeaux said. “He wants to go back. It’s just a question of what the terms are. He doesn’t want Malaysia to become Guantánamo 2.0.”
“I think everybody in Washington needs a kick in the rear,” Ms. Meadows, 68, said on Thursday as she ate fried fish at a diner in Warren, a weathered city at the county’s southern end. “And I think Washington needs to be done with the Clintons.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  She added, however, that she hoped Mr. Trump would not “do away with the health care” — Mr. Obama’s Affordable Care Act — as he had promised on the campaign trail. Her daughter had obtained subsidized insurance coverage through the law for $50 a month.  “I think he was bluffing,” Ms. Meadows said with a frown.  Mayor James R. Fouts of Warren said Trump supporters here were especially motivated by Mr. Trump’s promise to overturn or overhaul the North American Free Trade Agreement, which they blame for the loss of American manufacturing jobs to Mexico. All year, Mr. Trump has attacked Ford Motor Company in particular for planning to move all of its small car production to Mexico.  Photo  Noting that Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont also criticized free trade agreements when he ran against Mrs. Clinton in the Democratic primary race, Mr. Fouts said that some who normally vote Democrat in Macomb County had initially supported Mr. Sanders and migrated to Mr. Trump only after Mrs. Clinton became the Democratic nominee.  “There were a significant number of Sanders people who made the transition to Trump,” said Mr. Fouts, whose office is nonpartisan. “Bernie might have won here; Joe Biden might have won. But Hillary was never going to be the candidate to convince people around here that she was going to make a difference in their lives.”  Mr. Fouts voted for Mr. Obama twice. But this time he rejected both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump for a third-party candidate — which one, he would not say.  The last time the county backed a Republican presidential candidate was in 2004.  Mr. Trump may also have energized a segment of Macomb County voters who had not bothered to participate in the 2012 election. Voter turnout in the county was 4 percent higher this year, according to preliminary results, with 67 percent of registered voters casting ballots. On the other hand, some of the state’s most heavily Democratic counties, including Wayne, home to Detroit, and Genesee, home to Flint, saw less turnout than four years ago.  Photo  Amanda Rogers, a bartender in Warren, sat out the 2012 election but hustled to the polls to vote for Mr. Trump. Her boyfriend and her brother voted for the first time in their lives, she said. Ms. Rogers, 34, was motivated in part by what she saw as Mrs. Clinton’s lenient stance on immigration.  “We are drowning right now,” she said. “Our vets are homeless. There’s one out of every five American children starving right now. And Clinton wants to open the floodgates and let everybody else in.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Rogers, who said she had “loved Bill Clinton as a president” and found Mr. Obama “all right,” added: “There’s people who’ve been here 12 years who don’t even care to learn the language but want to reap all the benefits of this country: food stamps, free health care, Section 8 housing, welfare checks. People are sick of that, especially in Macomb County.”  Muslims from places like Yemen and Bangladesh are the most visible immigrants here. Just south of Macomb County is Hamtramck, which in one generation went from overwhelmingly Polish Catholic to majority Muslim. In Macomb, the City of Sterling Heights, home to a large Ford plant, is facing a federal lawsuit after rejecting a proposed mosque last year.  Photo  Mr. Trump held a rally last Sunday in Sterling Heights, where he elicited boos against Mrs. Clinton when he said she wanted “virtually unlimited immigration from the most dangerous regions of the world,” and would “import generations of terrorism, extremism and radicalism into your schools and your communities.”  Macomb County, though still largely white, is becoming more diverse: 82.3 percent of its 865,000 residents were white in 2015, according to the Census Bureau, down from 85.4 percent in 2010. The black population grew to 11.4 percent, from 8.6 percent. About 10 percent of the population is foreign born.  Many here also complain that poverty and crime are growing. As Macomb helped assure Mr. Trump’s victory on Election Day, it also played a major role in the defeat of a local ballot initiative that would have taxed its residents, and those of four neighboring counties, to build a public transportation system connecting Detroit and its suburbs.  Jason Powrozek, 18, a high school senior from New Baltimore, on the more affluent north side of the county, said he had voted against the transportation measure because “I just felt it would speed up the transport of drugs up here from the inner city.” A first-time voter, he had volunteered for at the county Republican headquarters and went to New York for the Trump campaign’s election night party.  “He tells it like it is,” Jason said of Mr. Trump. “He speaks what people don’t want to say because it’s politically incorrect.”  Mr. Trump also spoke on Halloween at Macomb Community College.  Frank Pitcher, 49, who lives in Sterling Heights and has worked at its Ford plant for 23 years, went to the Trump rally there and said he was surprised at how many of his co-workers he saw.  “I took some pictures with people there and posted on my Facebook because I wasn’t going to hide how I was voting,” he said. “I’m not ashamed of where I stand.”
Election night maps of Pennsylvania for decades included a bright blue crescent in the upper left corner. It was Erie County, a Democratic stronghold with an industrial economy that President Obama won by 16 percentage points in 2012. But Mr. Trump flipped the county, winning by two points as he carried Pennsylvania, one of the Rust Belt dominoes whose white working-class voters came out in droves for him.  Photo  “My views have realigned,” said Chris Trott, 26, a small-business owner who voted for Mr. Obama four years ago, but for Mr. Trump this time. “The world has changed a lot.”  Mr. Trott was having breakfast at Dominick’s 24-Hour Eatery (“Home of the meatball omelette”) on 12th Street, once Erie’s corridor of industrial plants, most of them now mothballed. The front page of The Erie Times-News in the box out front proclaimed “A New Reality.”  The population of the city of Erie recently slid below 100,000 for the first time in nearly a century. About 10 percent of its residents are refugees, resettled with the help of local agencies and injecting new blood as the economy shifts from industry to small businesses. Still, after General Electric laid off 1,500 people this year, anxiety spiked along with the jump in unemployment, which rose to 6.4 percent from 4.5 percent.  In August, more than 10,000 people filled the Erie Insurance Arena to hear Mr. Trump hammer the twin themes he effectively drove all year: that trade deals have hollowed out the United States’ industrial core, and that undocumented immigrants and refugees threaten the nation’s safety.  Democrats here lost the messaging war about jobs; about Mr. Obama’s achievements, including the Affordable Care Act, which covers 600,000 Pennsylvanians; and, especially, about Hillary Clinton’s trustworthiness and her connection to the working-class Americans President Bill Clinton once viscerally inspired.  “Erie has historically loved the Clintons,” said State Representative Ryan A. Bizzarro, a Democrat who won re-election from a suburban district in the county.  Photo  He was shocked by what he heard knocking on doors while campaigning this year.  “Every door I’d go to they’d say, ‘I don’t like Donald Trump, but I don’t like Hillary,’” said Mr. Bizzarro, 30, a scion of a local family that owns car dealerships and includes the retired prizefighter Lou Bizzarro, who once fought Roberto Duran.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “These were Democrats I was trying to get to support her,” he said. “They said they didn’t like her, and one of the main reasons was they felt she was not truthful. The Trump campaign effectively was able to make an issue of her supposedly being dishonest.”  The fierceness of the contest here stunned people, as an old order crumbled amid angry outbursts. Signs for both Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton were repeatedly vandalized. One Trump sign on West 38th Street was wrapped in barbed-wire coils.  Lou Aliota said a large Trump/Pence sign that he erected in his yard was hit with a paintball gun and with eggs. He replaced it with a sign 15 feet high.  “I am ecstatic right now,” Mr. Aliota, a retired pharmacist and school board member, said on Thursday. “In the next four years, you’re going to see an America that is strong. That is going be a beautiful thing.”  On another neighborhood street, a driver swerved onto the front lawn of the home of Betty and Gerald Hoffman to mow down their Clinton sign.  Photo  “I’m scared to death of Trump,” Ms. Hoffman said, coming to the door from watching C-SPAN, on which she said a woman was in tears over potentially losing her coverage if the health care law is repealed.  Ms. Hoffman fears that a more conservative Supreme Court will overturn Roe v. Wade. In the 1960s, she said, she was hospitalized when one of the twin fetuses she was carrying died in utero. She was told she would not live if the other were not aborted, but the Catholic hospital in which she was bedridden for 11 days refused. Her husband was told to call their three children to her bedside to say goodbye, but a doctor eventually performed the abortion, saving her life, she said. “I think a woman should control her own body,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump energized plenty of hard-core supporters in Erie County. But others who voted for him said they did not much like him and had cast their votes reluctantly. Their ambivalence suggests they could turn against Mr. Trump if he does not deliver quickly on his promises.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “I agonized over this decision,” said Mark Miller, 53, who voted for Mr. Trump but faulted the president-elect’s “inability to think before he speaks.”  He parted ways with Mr. Trump over his call to bar refugees and deport undocumented immigrants en masse. “I’d like to see these people integrated into the system,” said Mr. Miller, who owns a John Deere dealership. “A lot of them are good, hard-working people.” They live in Erie’s old residential blocks of modest bungalow-style homes, and they buy chain saws and lawn mowers from Mr. Miller.  Local officials said Mr. Trump’s dire warnings about refugees during his visit here (“Take a look at what’s happening,” the candidate said) hit a nerve in rural parts of the county where voters, mostly white, have less exposure to the newcomers from Nepal, Bhutan, Bosnia and, yes, Iraq and Syria.  Photo  In the borough of Wesleyville, nearby the enormous General Electric locomotive plant, Jennie and Jack Chilcott, retirees, were sharing a booth at Russ’ Dinor, a homey eatery that adopts the local spelling of “diner.” Both are Democrats who voted for Mr. Obama four years ago.  “I voted for Trump because I didn’t like the Democrat,” said Ms. Chilcott, who retired from General Electric after 40 years. “The lies. Benghazi. The email. I just waited for her to get up there and justify everything, and she just beat around the bush about it.”  Mr. Chilcott told his wife: “She actually did apologize. I still think she thought she was above the law.”  Mr. Chilcott, who wore an Army veteran’s cap, chose Mr. Trump “for a change,” he said.  “That’s why I voted for Obama,” he said. “I thought he was going to do something. He didn’t do anything.”  Mr. Chilcott was laid off after 32 years when Erie City Iron Works shut its doors in 1995, one of numerous plant closings that had more to do with the city’s aging, inefficient industry than global trade deals.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I was 49 and had to start all over again,” he said. “I worked for half the wages and no vacation.”  He said he was “shocked” that Mr. Trump won. He attributes it to blue-collar voters like himself, working and retired, who fear for their economic security.  But he echoed the caveat a number of Republican officials uttered this year about Mr. Trump, suggesting his support from Democrats in traditional blue counties is provisional.  “We didn’t support him,” Mr. Chilcott said. “We did vote for him.”
The result was overwhelming support for Mr. Trump that polls utterly failed to predict, lifting turnout among Republican voters and even turning some reliably blue counties red. Stark County, a former manufacturing center south of Cleveland where voters have chosen Democrats in the past three presidential elections, was one of more than 215 that flipped to Mr. Trump.  Photo  “His points really hit home for us,” said Jacob Hawk, 23, an electrician from Minerva, Ohio, who voted for Mr. Obama in 2012. “A huge portion of it was just bringing jobs back to Ohio.”  In many ways, the vote here was just as much a rebellion against Mrs. Clinton as a choice made for Mr. Trump. Some say they saw her as the queen of a political dynasty whose reputation was tarnished in the 1990s. Her message felt flat and uninspiring. Perhaps most damaging, she was tainted by 1990s trade deals associated with her husband, former President Bill Clinton, that cost the Midwest, and Ohio in particular, many jobs, a point Mr. Trump hammered away at.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Our guys bring that up to this day,” said Tim McCort, the director of a training center for electricians and a union member. “That was devastating to this area.”  He added: “They didn’t like Hillary. She just didn’t come off as being honest.”  Polls got wrong something that residents in swing states plainly saw: Enthusiasm for Mr. Trump was boundless, while the feeling for Mrs. Clinton, outside of a handful of liberal strongholds, was like a body on life support. John McCall, 70, a lawyer who drove from his daughter’s house in Philadelphia to his home in Canton, Ohio, said he was surprised by the difference in yard signs.  “We were amazed,” Mr. McCall, who voted for Mr. Trump, said as he ate lunch at Athens Restaurant in Canton. “Once you got to the middle of Pennsylvania, it was Trump, Trump, Trump, Trump. But where were her signs? There was just a complete lack. It was the same in Ohio.”  He added, “When we got home, I told my wife that this election is a complete lock.”  The numbers in Stark County tell the tale. In the 2012 presidential election, there were about 79,000 registered Democrats, compared with about 63,000 registered Republicans, according to the county’s Board of Elections. In this election, the number of Democrats had fallen to about 42,500, while the number of Republicans had risen to more than 72,400. (Unaffiliated registrations also rose, and some said Democrats were changing parties to block Mr. Trump in the primary race.) Ultimately, Mr. Trump took 56 percent of the county’s vote, to Mrs. Clinton’s 39 percent.  Photo  “People are starting to say, ‘Hey, I think we’ve had enough,’” said Mr. Noble, who estimated that about half of his colleagues in the union also voted for Mr. Trump. “You’ve promised us so many things,” he said, referring to the Democratic Party, “and you don’t deliver. Show us how you are going to help us.”  Michael Hanke, a former editor of The Repository, a local newspaper, said support for Mr. Trump grew out of a deep vein of despair stretching back to the 1980s, when wages began to stagnate and factory jobs started going away. Young people left for college and never came back. Drugs arrived. Families fell apart.  It did not help that their problems were barely noticed by the news media or Washington policy makers. (Opioids have been devastating towns in Ohio since at least the 1990s, but wider attention to the problem has come only recently.)  “People feel despair when they hear that the economy is getting better but their own personal economy is not,” Mr. Hanke said. He added that as journalists became more educated, they also became less connected to the broader community. “Locally, I’m not so sure we caught it, either. Even though we were here.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the election here was about more than just a rejection of Mrs. Clinton. It was also an affirmation of Mr. Trump and his message. It caused a strange new split in the voting patterns of the electrical workers local. Most union leaders voted, as they always do, for the Democrat, Mrs. Clinton. But many rank-and-file electricians did not.  Mr. Hawk, the young electrician, said he voted for Mr. Trump because his economic program spoke to him in ways that Mrs. Clinton’s did not.  Photo  “I can’t say I would have been extremely upset if she had won,” he said while at a night class at a job training center, where he is studying to boost his credentials. “I wouldn’t have seen it like the country’s going to end if she became president. I was just pro what he was selling more than what she was selling.”  Mr. McCort, the training center director, is skeptical that any president has the power to unleash a flood of jobs, and worries that Mr. Trump, instead of stamping out moneyed interests in Washington, will be ushering in an era of new ones.  “You know darn well he’s going to be shooting from the business side of the fence,” Mr. McCort said. Still, he added: “One day at a time. I’ve got to trust that our country is a good place and it’s going to be O.K.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As for the Democratic Party, he said, “They really have some soul-searching to do in Ohio.”  Mr. Hawk believes Mr. Trump will deliver the essence of what he has promised.  “Do I think he’s going to accomplish building a wall? No. Do I think there will be some reforms of how immigration works and protection of the borders? Yes. And that would be nice.”  Mr. Hawk has been too busy to watch television, working a full-time job and taking night classes, so he has missed most of the scenes of the anti-Trump protests across the country. But he has been turned off by the constant talk of racism. Mr. Hawk cast the first vote of his life for Mr. Obama because, he said, “I liked his demeanor. The way he inspired people to be better.”  Photo  “They tried really hard to sell the whole racism thing,” he said. “Anytime you turned on the TV or were listening to the radio, it was always there.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Residents of swing counties like Stark are far less likely to be bubbles of like-minded people. But lately, that has been causing some stress. Disagreements over the election have ruined Thanksgiving plans, and even sundered some friendships. Some are in mourning. Fred Haymond, 70, roasted a turkey, “comfort food,” he said, and invited over his adult children.  “My country, as I remember it, would not have voted for this man,” he said.  At 12:47 a.m., on the night of the election, Bill Theiss, 70, a wine merchant from Canton and an enthusiastic supporter of Mr. Trump, got a text message from his daughter, who is 37 and lives in Hawaii.  “I am disgusted,” she wrote.  He sent one back: “You know what your father thinks.”  She replied with a long rant, full of angry words about fears for her daughter.  “I knew she had some feelings, I just didn’t know how deep,” Mr. Theiss said. “It was tough. It was very hard for me to read.”  He has not written back yet.
Photo  WASHINGTON — After his party’s brutal Election Day loss, Senator Chuck Schumer, the presumptive incoming Democratic minority leader, threw his support on Friday behind a liberal member of Congress to be the next chairman of the Democratic National Committee.  Mr. Schumer’s choice, Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota, is a favorite of the party’s left. Should he win the chairmanship, he would become one of the Democrats’ most visible spokesmen as the party seeks to regroup after losing the White House and an array of state-level offices to a populist wave fueled by white working-class voters.  The move signals the desire of Mr. Schumer to score early points with Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Bernie Sanders of Vermont, leaders from the party’s left. Mr. Schumer is likely to have to disappoint them at times in legislative battles after President-elect Donald J. Trump takes office as he seeks to protect endangered Democrats from Republican-leaning states who are up for re-election in 2018.  But Mr. Ellison, should he decide to run, will face some competition from Democrats who believe that the chairmanship should be a full-time job, not one that is split with the duties of being an elected official. Some Democrats also say they feel that the party should be run by someone who hails from an industrial state where the party has lost voters and support.  Others who are interested in the job include a former chairman, Howard Dean, a former governor of Vermont; Martin O’Malley, a former governor of Maryland; Raymond Buckley, the chairman of the New Hampshire Democratic Party; and Jaime R. Harrison, the chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “We have to do a better job of talking about not just equal rights for blacks and Latinos, but everybody,” Mr. Harrison said. “It doesn’t matter if you are a white person in West Virginia or a black person in South Carolina or New York City, we are fighting for each and every one of you.”  President Obama largely ignored the organization, charged with building the party’s foundation and electing Democrats to office, in favor of his own political group, Organizing for Action. The Democratic National Committee has been run since this summer by Donna Brazile after the previous leader, Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida, stepped down after the leak of committee emails that portrayed her in an unflattering light.  “The infrastructure of the party is in shambles,” said Mo Elleithee, a Democratic strategist. “You need someone who is going to really roll up their sleeves and figure that piece out.”  Photo  Mr. Ellison, 53, has served in the House since 2007, representing greater Minneapolis. An African-American Muslim and the leader of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, he was an early supporter of Mr. Sanders and was among a relative handful of Democrats who took Mr. Trump’s prospects as a presidential candidate seriously from the beginning.  The central challenges for the next party chairman, Democrats say, include rebuilding the party’s ailing infrastructure and finding a way to excite voters. Of particular interest are those who backed Mr. Obama but did not support Hillary Clinton, and white working-class voters who have drifted to the Republicans.  “Without a Democratic White House, Schumer’s view is the D.N.C. is where grass-roots organizing in sync with legislative battles should be organized,” said Matt House, a spokesman for Mr. Schumer.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But Democrats may also find themselves in an ideological tangle that has knotted up both parties for the past several years. Progressives like Mr. Sanders, Ms. Warren and Mr. Ellison could be at odds with more moderate Democrats, including a large number who face tough re-election fights in 2018 in the Senate.  “I really, really like Keith,” Ms. Warren said this week on MSNBC, speaking about Mr. Ellison. “And I think he’s terrific, and I think he would make a terrific D.N.C. chair.”  The chairman’s role is traditionally focused less on defining the party’s ideological stance than on fund-raising, providing the party with the technology and other tools it needs to be competitive and organizing at the grass-roots level.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The worst thing the party can do is have a big fight over whether the chairman should be a progressive or moderate,” Mr. Elleithee said. “We don’t live on that paradigm anymore, and this election proved it.”  Mr. O’Malley said he was considering seeking the job because “our party needs to rebuild.”  “We need to acknowledge that our message did not communicate credibly enough for a large number of Americans, and we need to do it urgently in a collaborative and inclusive way,” he said. “This is not what I expected to be doing. Given my background as well as my experience traveling the country, there are people who have called me and told me I should run.”  Mr. Dean, who has said he is “very interested” in the job, employed a so-called 50-state strategy when he was chairman in 2005, working to recruit in places Democrats have often failed to flourish. He said this week that his strategy ought to be employed again.
Mr. Trump was swept to power in large part by white working-class voters who responded to his vow to restore the voices of forgotten people, ones drowned out by big business and Wall Street. But in his transition to power, some of the most prominent voices will be those of advisers who come from the same industries for which they are being asked to help set the regulatory groundwork.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The president-elect’s spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, declined a request for comment, as did nearly a dozen corporate executives, consultants and lobbyists serving on his transition team, which was outlined in a list distributed widely in Washington on Thursday.  A number of the people on that list are well-established experts with no clear interest in helping private-sector clients. But to critics of Mr. Trump — both Democrats and Republicans — the inclusion of advisers with industry ties is a first sign that he may not follow through on all of his promises.  “This whole idea that he was an outsider and going to destroy the political establishment and drain the swamp were the lines of a con man, and guess what — he is being exposed as just that,” said Peter Wehner, who served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush before becoming a speechwriter for George W. Bush. “He is failing the first test, and he should be held accountable for it.”  Transition teams help new presidents pick the new cabinet, as well as up to 4,000 political appointees who will take over top posts in agencies across the government. President Obama, after he was first elected, instituted rules that prohibited individuals who had served as registered lobbyists in the prior year from serving as transition advisers in the areas in which they represented private clients. They were also prohibited, after the administration took power, from lobbying in the parts of the government they helped set up.  “They wanted to make sure that people were not putting their thumb on the scale, or even the perception of that,” said Martha Joynt Kumar, the director of a nonprofit group called the White House Transition Project, which has studied two decades of presidential transitions.  Among the advisers assisting Mr. Trump who have no clear private-sector ties are Brian Johnson, a top lawyer for the House Financial Services Committee, who is helping to pick top staff members for the federal government’s many financial services agencies.  Edwin Meese III, who served as attorney general under Mr. Reagan and is now associated with the Heritage Foundation, the conservative think tank, is helping oversee management and budget issues, along with Kay Coles James, a Bush administration official who now runs an institute that trains future African-American leaders.  Former Representative Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan, who served as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and was once a special agent in the F.B.I., is overseeing issues related to national security, including the intelligence agencies and the Department of Homeland Security.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But in other areas, most notably the energy sector, the transition team advisers are far from independent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Catanzaro’s client list is a who’s who of major corporate players — such as the Hess Corporation and Devon Energy — that have tried to challenge the Obama administration’s environmental and energy policies on issues such as how much methane gas can be released at oil and gas drilling sites, lobbying disclosure reports show.  He also worked with oil industry players to help push through major legislation goals, such as allowing the export of crude oil. He will now help pick Mr. Trump’s energy team.  Michael McKenna, another lobbyist helping to pick key administration officials who will oversee energy policy, has a client list that this year has included the Southern Company, one of the most vocal critics of efforts to prevent climate change by putting limits on emissions from coal-burning power plants.  Advisers with ties to other industries include Martin Whitmer, who is overseeing “transportation and infrastructure” for the Trump transition. He is the chairman of a Washington law firm whose lobbying clients include the Association of American Railroads and the National Asphalt Pavement Association.  David Malpass, the former chief economist at Bear Stearns, the Wall Street investment bank that collapsed during the 2008 financial crisis, is overseeing the “economic issues” portfolio of the transition, as well as operations at the Treasury Department. Mr. Malpass now runs a firm called Encima Global, which sells economic research to institutional investors and corporate clients.  Mr. Eisenach, as a telecom industry consultant, has worked to help major cellular companies fight back against regulations proposed by the F.C.C. that would mandate so-called net neutrality — requiring providers to give equal access to their networks to outside companies. He is now helping to oversee the rebuilding of the staff at the F.C.C.  Dan DiMicco, a former chief executive of the steelmaking company Nucor, who now serves on the board of directors of Duke Energy, is heading the transition team for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. Mr. DiMicco has long argued that China is unfairly subsidizing its manufacturing sector at the expense of American jobs.  In his campaign, Mr. Trump promised to take steps to close the so-called revolving door, through which government officials leave their posts and then personally profit by helping private companies reap rewards from policies or programs they had recently managed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In October, declaring that “it’s time to drain the swamp in Washington,” he promised to institute a five-year ban in which all executive branch officials would be prevented from lobbying the government after they left. He has also promised to expand the definition of a lobbyist, so it includes corporate consultants who do not register as lobbyists but still often act like one.  Bruce F. Freed, the president of a nonprofit group called the Center for Political Accountability, which is pressing major corporations to be more transparent about their political spending, said Mr. Trump’s transition team had sent an unfortunate signal to his followers.  “This is one of the reasons you had such anger among voters — people rigging the system, gaming the system,” Mr. Freed said. “This represents more of the same.”
But if Mr. Trump makes good on his campaign promises, experts in climate change policy warn, that legacy would unravel quickly. The world, then, may have no way to avoid the most devastating consequences of global warming, including rising sea levels, extreme droughts and food shortages, and more powerful floods and storms.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has already vowed to “cancel” last year’s Paris climate agreement, which commits more than 190 countries to reduce their emissions of planet-warming carbon dioxide pollution, and to dismantle the Clean Power Plan, Mr. Obama’s domestic climate change regulations.  “If Trump steps back from that, it makes it much less likely that the world will ever meet that target, and essentially ensures we will head into the danger zone,” said Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences and international affairs at Princeton University and a member of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which produces global reports on the state of climate science.  Mr. Trump cannot legally block other countries from fulfilling their Paris agreement commitments, nor can he quickly or unilaterally erase Mr. Obama’s climate rules.  But he can, as president, choose not to carry out the Paris plan in the United States. And he could so substantially slow or weaken the enforcement of Mr. Obama’s rules that they would have little impact on reducing emissions in the United States, at least during Mr. Trump’s term.  That could doom the Paris agreement’s goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions enough to stave off an atmospheric warming of at least 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, the point at which, many scientists say, the planet will be locked into an irreversible future of extreme and dangerous warming.  Without the full participation of the United States, the world’s second-largest greenhouse gas polluter, after China, that goal is probably unattainable, even if every other country follows through on its pledges.  And, the experts say, without the participation of the United States, other governments are less likely to carry out their pledged emissions cuts.  “That target is already extremely difficult to achieve, but it could be done with very hard, very diligent work by every single country,” Mr. Oppenheimer said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The election of Mr. Trump is likely to cast a pall over Marrakesh, Morocco, where global negotiators have gathered for a 12-day conference to hash out the next steps for the Paris accord: how to verify commitments are being met, and how to pay for enforcement by poor countries that cannot afford the technology or energy disruptions.  Traveling in New Zealand, Secretary of State John Kerry was asked if he still planned to attend the conference, given the results of the election.  “I’m absolutely going to Marrakesh, perhaps even more important,” he said. “And I look forward to being there very, very much.”  Pessimism appears to be warranted. Mr. Oppenheimer and other climate policy experts said all major emitters needed to take action in the near term to stave off the 3.6-degree increase.  Scientific reports released over the last two years have concluded that the measurable warming of the planet because of human activities has already begun. This year is on track to be the hottest on record, blasting past the previous records set in 2015 and 2014.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  An analysis by Climate Interactive, a scientific think tank that provides data used by many governments, concluded that the policies by the United States would account for about 20 percent of the expected greenhouse gas reductions under the Paris plan from 2016 to 2030. But absent the expected policy actions in the United States under the Trump administration, scientists at Climate Interactive said, the math of emissions reductions will be much more difficult to maintain.  “Pessimists will find abundant support for despair this morning,” John Sterman, a professor of system dynamics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wrote in a Climate Interactive analysis on Wednesday morning.  “With Mr. Trump in the Oval Office and Republican majorities in both houses,” Mr. Sterman wrote, “there is little hope that the Clean Power Plan will survive in the Supreme Court or for federal action to meet the U.S. commitment under the Paris accord. Worse, other key emitter nations — especially India — now have little reason to follow through on their Paris pledges: If the U.S. won’t, why should developing nations cut their emissions?”  The Clean Power Plan is the ambitious centerpiece of Mr. Obama’s climate change legacy and the key to his commitment under the Paris accord. At its heart is a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations intended to curb planet-warming pollution from coal-fired power plants. If enacted, the rules could transform the American electricity sector, close hundreds of coal-fired plants and usher in the construction of vast new wind and solar farms. The plan is projected to cut United States power plant emissions 32 percent from 2005 levels by 2030.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the program is currently under litigation by 28 states and more than 100 companies, and it is expected to go before the Supreme Court as early as next year.  More Reporting on Climate Change  Mr. Trump and other Republicans have attacked the Clean Power Plan as a “war on coal.” As president, Mr. Trump would not have the legal authority to unilaterally undo the regulations, which were put forth by the E.P.A. under a provision of the 1970 Clean Air Act.  However, Mr. Trump could target the rules by appointing an industry-friendly justice to the Supreme Court and then refusing to defend the plan when it goes before the court.  He could also direct the E.P.A. to reissue the plan to be extremely friendly to industry. Such a move would also be subject to lawsuits by environmental advocates, which would further drag out the process. And in concert with congressional Republicans, he could decimate the E.P.A.’s budget, crippling its rule-making capacity.  “They may still have to have a regulation, but they don’t have to do it the way the Obama administration did it,” said Jeff Holmstead, a former E.P.A. official in the George W. Bush administration. “And in the meantime, those suits often go on for years and years.”  Even if Mr. Trump ultimately fails to gut Mr. Obama’s climate change rules, he could ensure that their enforcement is delayed through his term, as lawsuits wind their way through the courts.  Mr. Trump would face difficulties in his plans to eliminate the E.P.A., although it is likely he could substantively reduce its size. He would need approval from Congress to completely erase the agency, said Jody Freeman, a professor of environmental law at Harvard University and a former counselor to Mr. Obama.  Ms. Freeman noted that several major environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act, specifically call for rules to be enacted and overseen by the E.P.A. Changing those decades-old rules would also require action from Congress, and Senate Democrats would certainly block such efforts — unless Senate Republican leaders opt to scuttle what is left of filibuster rules already weakened by Democrats.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In China, the world’s largest greenhouse gas polluter, climate change officials said they intended to continue with plans to cut carbon emissions regardless of Mr. Trump’s plans. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has vowed under the Paris agreement that Chinese emissions will drop after 2030, and that China will put in place a national system next year to force companies to pay a fee for their carbon pollution.  “China’s attitude toward low-carbon development, as President Xi Jinping has said when he met with Secretary of State Kerry earlier, is that tackling climate change is not something anybody asks us to do,” Chai Qimin, a Chinese negotiator, said in an emailed response from the Marrakesh talks. “It’s what we want to do.”  But in India, the world’s third-largest greenhouse gas polluter, the election of Mr. Trump has raised doubts about a willingness to move forward. Under the Obama administration, Hillary Clinton, then secretary of state, pledged that rich countries would mobilize $100 billion annually by 2020 to help poor countries make the transition to cleaner forms of energy. Indian officials have made clear that their steps to cut emissions will depend on financial aid from rich countries, but Mr. Trump has also vowed to cut all “global warming payments.”  “I think most certainly it will affect the momentum in negotiations because it throws up a lot of questions,” said Arunabha Ghosh, chief executive of the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, a New Delhi policy group.  “The chances of public funds coming from climate finance are much more dismal now,” he said. “Right now I don’t feel very optimistic.”
Clinton calls her loss ‘painful,’ but urges unity.  • Mrs. Clinton thanked her supporters in her concession speech, and said that she felt pride in the campaign she ran.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • Of Mr. Trump, Mrs. Clinton said she hoped that he would be “a successful president for all Americans,” and that she respected and cherished the peaceful transition of power. She told her supporters that they must accept that Mr. Trump would be president. “We owe him an open mind and a chance to lead,” she said. But she also acknowledged that the country was more divided than she had realized.  • After a long campaign, Mrs. Clinton acknowledged that the loss cuts deep. “This is painful, and it will be for a long time,” she said. She also expressed regret that she did not shatter the glass ceiling, but said, “Someday, someone will, and hopefully sooner than we might think right now.”  • Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, who spoke before Mrs. Clinton, said, “I’m proud of Hillary Clinton because she has been and is a great history maker,” pointing to her long career of public service. He saluted her for winning the popular vote in the election, drawing cheers.  Obama on Trump: We are ‘all rooting for his success.’  • Mr. Obama said that he and former President George W. Bush had major differences eight years ago, but they managed a successful transition. He said he expected to do the same with Mr. Trump, while acknowledging that they have their differences, and he invited the president-elect to come to the White House on Thursday.  • Mr. Obama reminded the country that we “are all on the same team” and characterized politics as an “intramural scrimmage.” He said that he was heartened by the conversation that he had with Mr. Trump at 3:30 a.m. and that he hoped Mr. Trump maintains that spirit.  • Mr. Obama said that he was proud of Mrs. Clinton, who gave her concession speech on Wednesday just before Mr. Obama spoke, and called her a historic figure.  • Mr. Obama called on Americans to move forward with the presumption of good faith in fellow citizens. He said that those who were disappointed should not give up on their dreams. “Sometimes you lose an argument, sometimes you lose an election,” he said, with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. by his side. “But the path this country has taken has never been a straight line. We zig and zag.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Senator Bernie Sanders says he is ready to work with and against Trump.  The Vermont senator, who ran against Mrs. Clinton in the Democratic primary campaign, was silent on the election for most of Wednesday, but in the early evening he offered something of an olive branch to Mr. Trump and acknowledged the middle class anger that he tapped into.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “To the degree that Mr. Trump is serious about pursuing policies that improve the lives of working families in this country, I and other progressives are prepared to work with him,” Mr. Sanders said in a statement.  But Mr. Sanders maintained that he is opposed to much of what Mr. Trump has stood for and that he will fight any intolerance that he might try to promote as president.  “To the degree that he pursues racist, sexist, xenophobic and anti-environment policies, we will vigorously oppose him,” Mr. Sanders said.  Ryan continues his embrace of Trump.  Video  Mr. Ryan congratulated Mr. Trump for accomplishing an “enormous political feat” on Wednesday and said that he was looking forward to working with him to carry forward a Republican policy agenda and prioritize the repeal of the Affordable Care Act.  “This health care law is not a popular law,” Mr. Ryan said, adding that Congress had already shown it can get a repeal bill to the president’s desk. “This health care law is collapsing of its own weight.”  That clearly indicated that Republican leaders would use budget rules, called reconciliation, to gut the Affordable Care Act with only a majority of Congress, as they did in January. Senate Democrats would be powerless to filibuster the legislation under the parliamentary rules.  Mr. Ryan, who has had differences with Mr. Trump, said that they had spoken twice in the last 18 hours and that he was “very excited” about their ability to work together.  “He just earned a mandate,” Mr. Ryan said.  The Bushes reach out.  The last two Republican presidents gave the next Republican president congratulatory telephone calls on Wednesday.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Laura and I wish the president-elect, Melania and the entire Trump family all our very best as they take on an awesome responsibility and begin an exciting new chapter in their lives,” former President George W. Bush said in a statement.  Mr. Bush had been critical of Mr. Trump when he was campaigning on behalf of his brother Jeb this year but said that he was rooting for Mr. Trump now.  “We pray for the success of our country and the success of our new president,” Mr. Bush said.  Mr. Bush’s father, George Bush, the 41st president, also spoke to Mr. Trump on Wednesday. A spokesman said that they talked for about five minutes and that the call was friendly and gracious.  “Good luck on your new challenge,” Mr. Bush said.  Jeb Bush, the former Florida governor vanquished by Mr. Trump during the Republican primary process, sent Mr. Trump a congratulatory message on Twitter.  What becomes of the anti-Trump right?  Dozens of Republican elected officials resisted Mr. Trump’s rise to power, including some who revoked their endorsements in the heat of the general election. Senators like Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and John McCain of Arizona declared Mr. Trump unfit to lead, while ideological conservatives like Ben Sasse of Nebraska and Mike Lee of Utah warned of Mr. Trump’s indifference to the limits of government power.  These Trump critics on the right now face a wrenching political choice: to defer to him as the country’s new leader, or to take up a quasi-oppositional role against a Republican as he assembles his administration. Since Republicans kept control of the House and Senate, dissenters within Mr. Trump’s party may hold outsize influence over exactly how he can govern as president.  Mr. Graham took a reserved approach in his statement on the election on Tuesday, saying that he would aim to help Mr. Trump govern — within the bounds of a fairly conventional Republican agenda.
How Election Results Really Work  With 13 more Election Days, the primary season still has a long way to go. Here we answer your questions about how live election results are reported and published on the New York Times website and apps.  How does the Times get live election results?  Our live results and delegate counts are reported by The Associated Press. This is a large effort that includes sending correspondents to local government offices and having reporters gather vote tallies from state, county and other local officials, along with using data feeds from local governments. Election officials usually start releasing results after polls close.  How often are the results updated on election night?  Once The A.P. checks the vote totals, it sends updated data to The Times and other customers every three to five minutes. Race calls are sent immediately.  Times journalists have written software that automatically downloads and publishes the results, which takes only a few seconds. Don’t worry about refreshing the page. Results update automatically.  How does the Times call the winner of primary races?  We rely on The A.P.’s calls. This is how The A.P. describes its process for calling races:    The responsibility for calling races rests with experienced staff in each state. They are armed with on-the-ground knowledge that no other national news organization can match. Plus, they have information on demographics, absentee and other voting history and political issues that may affect the outcome of races they must call. On election night, they are assisted by experts in A.P.’s Washington bureau who examine exit poll numbers and votes as they are counted. A “decision desk” in Washington, headed by the Washington bureau chief, has the final signoff on all top-of-the-ticket calls.      How can The Times call a race before any votes are counted, as it did in Georgia, Vermont and Virginia?  News organizations can project a winner, even with no results, because elections tend to have predictable voting patterns.  Hillary Clinton polled well ahead of Bernie Sanders in Southern states and was named the winner of Georgia and Virginia immediately after polls closed. Mr. Sanders was declared the winner of his home state of Vermont before any results were released.  Most major media organizations wait until polls are closed before calling a winner.  Why do I see different vote counts on different websites?  State parties and governments may display their own results. Because these numbers are collected separately from The A.P., the two vote counts may not match until all votes are counted.  Some media organizations collect results independently of The A.P. Caucusgoers also informally post results on social media.  What’s a precinct, anyway?  A precinct is the smallest level at which election results are reported. A precinct may be a few city blocks or an entire county.  Why do states like Florida and Ohio have large vote counts with few or no precincts reporting?  Absentee and early votes may be announced before officials release results from votes cast on Election Day. The number of precincts reporting may remain at zero until Election Day votes are released.  Why do vote totals change after all precincts have reported?  This can happen for a number of reasons: Absentee ballots weren’t included at first and now they are; the local government hadn’t finished counting; an error was spotted and fixed. According to The A.P., some jurisdictions are moving away from the traditional count of precincts reporting as a measure of election night tabulation progress.  Officials might report just early votes for all precincts, mistakenly marking all precincts as being reported, before Election Day votes are added. Some counties use vote centers, which are polling places where a voter from anywhere in the county can cast a ballot. It is difficult to indicate how many precincts are reporting in these situations. This is why the number of precincts reporting may go down during live results.  Why do the results for Iowa show only 701 votes for Hillary Clinton?  Sometimes, the vote totals reported by the state or party are not the actual votes cast, but rather some other measure, such as the number of delegates supporting each candidate that were elected to the state convention.  Why do some states show less than 100 percent reporting after an election is over?  The A.P. said:  Frequently the transmission of precinct results to the county or city is manual — someone actually bringing a thumb drive from an optical scanner to the county, or bringing the precincts’ actual ballots to the county to be scanned there. It is not unusual for there to be mislaid cartridges or ballots left in a locked-up polling place on election night.  Even when the transmission of the precinct results to the county is electronic, there are inevitably precincts that don’t get sent because of bad thumb drives, no Wi-Fi connection, etc. And in some primaries in smaller counties there might literally be no voters casting a ballot for one party. So that might cause confusion as to whether that precinct has reported.  Why do parts of New Hampshire and Maine have no votes?  Because very few people live in those areas.  What are superdelegates?  The Democratic Party has 712 unpledged delegates, party leaders who are free to support any candidate. Most superdelegates have declared support for Mrs. Clinton, though they could switch candidates if she lost the lead in pledged delegates, which are awarded based on election results.  The Republican Party has more than 100 unpledged delegates. They can also switch candidates before the national convention in July.
But Mr. Obama’s place in history looks considerably different than a week ago. The transformation he envisioned may not survive his administration. He is leaving near the peak of his popularity, yet many of the voters who made Mr. Obama the nation’s first black president chose to replace him with a man who had peddled racially incendiary suggestions that he might not have been born in this country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In some ways, this follows a pattern: Americans grow weary of incumbent presidents and often pick successors perceived to be the opposite. John F. Kennedy was the vigorous young antidote to the aging Dwight D. Eisenhower. The cerebral Mr. Obama was the antithesis of the bring-‘em-on George W. Bush.  “My operative theory of presidential succession is people always choose the remedy to what they have; they never choose the replica — even when the incumbent is popular,” said David Axelrod, Mr. Obama’s longtime strategist.  Given that, aides argued that Mr. Trump’s election should not be viewed as a referendum on the president. “It was not a rejection of Obama or Obama-ism,” said Dan Pfeiffer, another former senior adviser. “It was probably more about the two candidates running in this election.”  Critics said there was no way to look at it as anything but a rebuff. “The election outcome is a clear repudiation of President Obama, his policies, his vision, how those policies will be implemented,” said Eric Cantor, the former House Republican majority leader. “And frankly, I think it reflects the fact that most Americans think he failed.”  Photo  Jay Winik, a historian who has studied presidents of the Civil War and World War II eras, said Mr. Obama would be remembered for helping the country move further beyond the ugly legacy of slavery and racism. “That said, it is hard not to think, from a historian’s point of view, Trump’s election changes our perspective on President Obama and his impact on the country, knocking him down a few pegs,” he said. “A huge swath of American people were hurting, the so-called forgotten American, and President Obama failed them.”  Mr. Obama could take solace from the fact that most Americans approve of his handling of the job in polls and more Americans voted for Mrs. Clinton than Mr. Trump, despite the Electoral College. Aides even interpreted the results as a validation of sorts for Mr. Obama, because Mr. Trump stood as the candidate of change, just as he had, albeit change of a different sort.  Indeed, Mr. Trump’s election imperils many of Mr. Obama policies, notably the health care law that has extended coverage to 20 million Americans but aggravated others who resented government intrusion and rising premiums. Mr. Trump has promised to scrap Mr. Obama’s international climate change agreement and Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact, renegotiate his Iran nuclear deal, dismantle Dodd-Frank regulations on Wall Street and reverse orders sparing millions of illegal immigrants from deportation.  But bold campaign rhetoric does not always translate into such clear-cut action. For instance, Mr. Eisenhower denounced Harry S. Truman’s foreign policy, only to largely adopt it after taking over. Along similar lines, Richard M. Nixon did not scrap Lyndon B. Johnson’s Great Society, and Mr. Obama ultimately preserved much of Mr. Bush’s counterterrorism program.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama’s team hopes Mr. Trump finds it harder to shift course than he expected. Taking health care away from millions of Americans might prove problematic, Mr. Obama’s advisers said. In recent days, Mr. Trump has said he will keep elements of the program and find a way to ensure that Americans do not lose coverage.  Moreover, although Mr. Obama said that all of his progress would go “out the window,” advisers now argue the opposite: that many accomplishments cannot be overturned. He will be remembered, they said, for pulling the country out of the Great Recession, saving the auto industry, bringing home most troops fighting overseas, killing Osama bin Laden, enacting higher fuel efficiency standards and restoring relations with Cuba.  Still, after two midterm defeats, this was the third time since taking office that voters rejected Mr. Obama’s advice. He campaigned all out for Mrs. Clinton as no departing incumbent has in modern times, only to relearn the lesson that presidents cannot transfer popularity.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  And there is no getting around the fact that Mr. Trump’s America is not Mr. Obama’s. He has said one of his biggest disappointments was failing to heal the country’s divisions. Polarization now seems worse than before.  Mr. Obama accepts only so much responsibility for that, faulting Republican obstructionism. He points to his early days in office, when he was heading to Capitol Hill to discuss the economic crisis only to hear that Representative John A. Boehner, the top House Republican, had already rejected the new president’s stimulus package out of hand.  “When I think about the polarization that occurred in 2009 and 2010, I’ve gone back and I’ve looked at my proposals and my speeches and the steps we took to reach out to Congress,” he told the historian Doris Kearns Goodwin in a pre-election conversation published by Vanity Fair. “And the notion that we weren’t engaging Congress or that we were overly partisan or we didn’t schmooze enough, or we didn’t reach out enough to Republicans — that whole narrative just isn’t true.”  Photo  Instead, he has pointed to Republican radicalization. “I see a straight line from the announcement of Sarah Palin as the vice-presidential nominee to what we see today in Donald Trump, the emergence of the Freedom Caucus, the Tea Party and the shift in the center of gravity for the Republican Party,” he told Jonathan Chait of New York magazine this fall.  Republicans, unsurprisingly, reject that narrative. Mr. Cantor, then Mr. Boehner’s No. 2, cited a now-famous White House meeting in those early days. In it, Mr. Cantor suggested his own economic measures only to be dismissed. “Eric, elections have consequences and I won,” he recalled the president saying.  “That was really the tenor of Obama’s Washington,” Mr. Cantor said. “It was much different from what the people heard him say on the trail. It was never really the vision that people were led to believe.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Cantor himself embodied the risks for Republicans perceived to be cooperating with Mr. Obama when he was ousted in a 2014 primary for not being conservative enough.  Mr. Obama does not talk publicly about the role of race in the opposition to him, but it is cited by many of his supporters. Republican intransigence must be explained at least in part by race, they figure — a refusal to accept the legitimacy of the first African-American president.  Yet lock-step opposition to Mr. Obama can also be explained by other factors, including political calculation and authentic philosophical disagreement. Mr. Obama’s opponents contend that he cites race to explain away valid criticism. His more virulent foes maintain that Mr. Obama is the one who fueled racial division.  Either way, Mr. Obama did not fully see the emerging threat. He dismissed Mr. Trump as a carnival barker and, like many in Washington, did not understand that much of the country was alienated enough to embrace such a figure.  To the president, Mr. Trump was a source of deep irritation for the racially charged accusation that he was not actually born in America. At the White House Correspondents Association dinner in 2011, Mr. Obama took revenge on Mr. Trump, mocking him and his reality show. (“You fired Gary Busey. And these are the kinds of decisions that would keep me up at night.”)  In talks beforehand, aides recalled no debate about going after Mr. Trump. He was, Mr. Axelrod said, “low-hanging fruit” for Mr. Obama. “I guarantee you that as he delivered those jokes he did not think he was roasting his successor,” he said. “I don’t think that would have remotely crossed his mind.”  David Litt, a former speechwriter for Mr. Obama, remembered thinking that evening that Mr. Trump had been destroyed politically, rendered a laughingstock. “That’s the end of Donald Trump,” he said he thought. Now the laughingstock holds the fate of Mr. Obama’s legacy in his hands.  “I think President Obama will still go down in history as a great and historic president,” Mr. Litt said. “But a lot of his accomplishments are going to be limited by what happened on Tuesday. There’s no getting around that.”
Her campaign said the seemingly positive outcome had only hurt it with voters who did not trust Mrs. Clinton and were receptive to Mr. Trump’s claims of a “rigged system.” In particular, white suburban women who had been on the fence were reminded of the email imbroglio and broke decidedly in Mr. Trump’s favor, aides said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After leading in polls in many battleground states, Mrs. Clinton told the donors on Saturday, “we dropped, and we had to keep really pushing to regain our advantage, which going into last weekend we had.”  “We were once again up in all but two of the battleground states, and we were up considerably in some that we ended up losing,” Mrs. Clinton said. “And we were feeling like we had to put it back together.”  Presidential candidates have a long history of blaming forces outside their control for their losses. In 2004, John Kerry linked his defeat to a videotape of Osama bin Laden that appeared days before the election, stoking fears about terrorism. In 2012, Mitt Romney told donors he had lost because President Obama had vowed to bestow “gifts” on Democratic special interests groups, namely African-Americans, Hispanics and young people.  Mrs. Clinton’s contention appears to be more rooted in reality — and hard data. An internal campaign memo with polling data said that “there is no question that a week from Election Day, Secretary Clinton was poised for a historic win,” but that, in the end, “late-breaking developments in the race proved one hurdle too many for us to overcome.”  Mrs. Clinton lost narrowly in several battleground states, and by the time all ballots are counted, she appears poised to win the popular vote by more than two million votes.  Still, Mrs. Clinton’s instinct to shun any personal responsibility angered some Democrats. Several donors on the call, while deeply bitter about Mr. Comey’s actions, said they believed that Mrs. Clinton and her campaign had suffered avoidable missteps that handed the election to an unacceptable opponent. They pointed to the campaign’s lack of a compelling message for white working-class voters and to decisions years ago by Mrs. Clinton to use a private email address at the State Department and to accept millions of dollars for speeches to Wall Street.  “There is a special place in hell for Clinton staff, allegedly including Cheryl Mills, that okayed the email server setup,” Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist and former senior aide to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, wrote on Sidewire, a social media site, referring to a longtime aide and lawyer to Mrs. Clinton.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign was so confident in her victory that her aides popped open Champagne on the campaign plane early Tuesday. But that conviction, aides would later learn, was based largely on erroneous data showing that young, black and Latino voters and suburban women who had been turned off by Mr. Trump’s comments but viewed Mrs. Clinton unfavorably would turn out for her in higher numbers than they ultimately did.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Exit polls conducted by Edison Research found that among people who said they had decided in the final week before Election Day, 47 percent voted for Mr. Trump and 42 percent for Mrs. Clinton.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As early as Wednesday morning, aides began to explain to Democrats shaken by the loss that the campaign’s sophisticated data modeling had not taken into account the bombshell F.B.I. announcement.  Mr. Comey’s letters to Congress went against the F.B.I.’s longstanding tradition of avoiding decisions that could affect elections, but he told aides that he felt he had no choice because he had already weighed in on the case so publicly. In July, he had taken the unusual step of publicly announcing that the F.B.I. would not charge Mrs. Clinton.  At the time, she believed she had finally put the issue to rest. And after the final debate on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, she emerged in such a strong position that she began to focus on campaigning for down-ballot Democrats and planned a campaign stop in traditionally Republican Arizona.  “We felt so good about where we were,” Mrs. Clinton told donors. Before Mr. Comey’s first letter to Congress, she added, “we just had a real wind at our back.”  Mr. Trump seized on the letter, telling voters in Nevada the Saturday before Election Day that “the F.B.I. has reopened its criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton,” and that the matter “would grind government to a halt” should Mrs. Clinton win the White House. The F.B.I.’s examination of the new emails did not in fact reopen the investigation.  Democratic pollsters attributed Mr. Trump’s laser-thin victories in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin — states that President Obama had won — largely to a drifting of college-educated suburban women to the Republican nominee at the last minute, because of the renewed focus on Mrs. Clinton’s email server.  “We lost with college-educated whites after leading with them all summer,” a Clinton spokesman, Brian Fallon, said on Wednesday. “Five more days of reminders about Comey, and they gravitated back to Trump.”  Before Mrs. Clinton spoke on Saturday, her finance director, Dennis Cheng, thanked the donors on the call, each of whom had raised at least $100,000. The campaign brought in nearly $1 billion to spend heavily on data efforts, to disperse hundreds of staff members to battleground states, and to air television advertisements — only to fall short to Mr. Trump’s upstart operation.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Donors conceded that, ultimately, no amount of money could match Mr. Trump’s crisp pitch, aimed at the economically downtrodden, to “make America great again.”  “You can have the greatest field program, and we did — he had nothing,” said Jay S. Jacobs, a prominent New York Democrat and donor to Mrs. Clinton. “You can have better ads, paid for by greater funds, and we did. Unfortunately, Trump had the winning argument.”  Mrs. Clinton has kept a low profile since her concession speech at a Midtown Manhattan hotel on Wednesday. On Thursday, a young mother with her 13-month-old daughter spotted Mrs. Clinton walking her dogs near her home in Chappaqua, N.Y., posting a photo of the defeated candidate on Facebook that quickly went viral along with the hashtag #ImStillWithHer.  On Friday night, Mrs. Clinton thanked volunteers on a nationwide conference call. “Look, I’m not going to sugarcoat it,” she said, sighing. “These have been very, very tough days.”
“I think everybody in Washington needs a kick in the rear,” Ms. Meadows, 68, said on Thursday as she ate fried fish at a diner in Warren, a weathered city at the county’s southern end. “And I think Washington needs to be done with the Clintons.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  She added, however, that she hoped Mr. Trump would not “do away with the health care” — Mr. Obama’s Affordable Care Act — as he had promised on the campaign trail. Her daughter had obtained subsidized insurance coverage through the law for $50 a month.  “I think he was bluffing,” Ms. Meadows said with a frown.  Mayor James R. Fouts of Warren said Trump supporters here were especially motivated by Mr. Trump’s promise to overturn or overhaul the North American Free Trade Agreement, which they blame for the loss of American manufacturing jobs to Mexico. All year, Mr. Trump has attacked Ford Motor Company in particular for planning to move all of its small car production to Mexico.  Photo  Noting that Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont also criticized free trade agreements when he ran against Mrs. Clinton in the Democratic primary race, Mr. Fouts said that some who normally vote Democrat in Macomb County had initially supported Mr. Sanders and migrated to Mr. Trump only after Mrs. Clinton became the Democratic nominee.  “There were a significant number of Sanders people who made the transition to Trump,” said Mr. Fouts, whose office is nonpartisan. “Bernie might have won here; Joe Biden might have won. But Hillary was never going to be the candidate to convince people around here that she was going to make a difference in their lives.”  Mr. Fouts voted for Mr. Obama twice. But this time he rejected both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump for a third-party candidate — which one, he would not say.  The last time the county backed a Republican presidential candidate was in 2004.  Mr. Trump may also have energized a segment of Macomb County voters who had not bothered to participate in the 2012 election. Voter turnout in the county was 4 percent higher this year, according to preliminary results, with 67 percent of registered voters casting ballots. On the other hand, some of the state’s most heavily Democratic counties, including Wayne, home to Detroit, and Genesee, home to Flint, saw less turnout than four years ago.  Photo  Amanda Rogers, a bartender in Warren, sat out the 2012 election but hustled to the polls to vote for Mr. Trump. Her boyfriend and her brother voted for the first time in their lives, she said. Ms. Rogers, 34, was motivated in part by what she saw as Mrs. Clinton’s lenient stance on immigration.  “We are drowning right now,” she said. “Our vets are homeless. There’s one out of every five American children starving right now. And Clinton wants to open the floodgates and let everybody else in.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Rogers, who said she had “loved Bill Clinton as a president” and found Mr. Obama “all right,” added: “There’s people who’ve been here 12 years who don’t even care to learn the language but want to reap all the benefits of this country: food stamps, free health care, Section 8 housing, welfare checks. People are sick of that, especially in Macomb County.”  Muslims from places like Yemen and Bangladesh are the most visible immigrants here. Just south of Macomb County is Hamtramck, which in one generation went from overwhelmingly Polish Catholic to majority Muslim. In Macomb, the City of Sterling Heights, home to a large Ford plant, is facing a federal lawsuit after rejecting a proposed mosque last year.  Photo  Mr. Trump held a rally last Sunday in Sterling Heights, where he elicited boos against Mrs. Clinton when he said she wanted “virtually unlimited immigration from the most dangerous regions of the world,” and would “import generations of terrorism, extremism and radicalism into your schools and your communities.”  Macomb County, though still largely white, is becoming more diverse: 82.3 percent of its 865,000 residents were white in 2015, according to the Census Bureau, down from 85.4 percent in 2010. The black population grew to 11.4 percent, from 8.6 percent. About 10 percent of the population is foreign born.  Many here also complain that poverty and crime are growing. As Macomb helped assure Mr. Trump’s victory on Election Day, it also played a major role in the defeat of a local ballot initiative that would have taxed its residents, and those of four neighboring counties, to build a public transportation system connecting Detroit and its suburbs.  Jason Powrozek, 18, a high school senior from New Baltimore, on the more affluent north side of the county, said he had voted against the transportation measure because “I just felt it would speed up the transport of drugs up here from the inner city.” A first-time voter, he had volunteered for at the county Republican headquarters and went to New York for the Trump campaign’s election night party.  “He tells it like it is,” Jason said of Mr. Trump. “He speaks what people don’t want to say because it’s politically incorrect.”  Mr. Trump also spoke on Halloween at Macomb Community College.  Frank Pitcher, 49, who lives in Sterling Heights and has worked at its Ford plant for 23 years, went to the Trump rally there and said he was surprised at how many of his co-workers he saw.  “I took some pictures with people there and posted on my Facebook because I wasn’t going to hide how I was voting,” he said. “I’m not ashamed of where I stand.”
Video  WASHINGTON — As president of the United States, Donald J. Trump would wield the power to carry out his vow to have a special prosecutor reopen the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s emails — if not to guarantee his threat to her that “you’d be in jail” if he ran the country.  But the move would take American democracy to a dangerous new place, legal specialists across the ideological spectrum said.  “It’s a chilling thought,” said Michael Chertoff, a former federal appeals court judge who also served as the secretary of Homeland Security and head of the Justice Department’s criminal division in the George W. Bush administration. Mr. Chertoff, who has announced that he will vote for Mrs. Clinton, added, “It smacks of what we read about tin-pot dictators in other parts of the world, where when they win an election their first move is to imprison opponents.”  Early in the debate on Sunday, Mr. Trump brought up the Justice Department’s investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server while secretary of state. That case was closed without charges on the recommendation of the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, but Mr. Trump said he would order it reopened.  “If I win, I am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation because there has never been so many lies, so much deception,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In response, Mrs. Clinton accused Mr. Trump of falsely describing the facts of the case, adding: “It’s just awfully good that someone with the temperament of Donald Trump is not in charge of the law in our country.”  Mr. Trump shot back: “Because you’d be in jail.”  The assertion by Mr. Trump is taking its place in a litany of statements he has made during the campaign that many legal specialists have portrayed as a threat to the rule of law. Those include his declaration that a judge could not be trusted because of his ethnicity; attacks on the press; and threats to use federal regulators against his critics.  Photo  “This is a manifestation of the same tendency to be willing to use the machinery of the state to go after one’s political enemies, which is very dangerous,” said David B. Rivkin Jr., a White House and Justice Department lawyer in the administration of the first President George Bush who has criticized the decision to close the email investigation without charges. “There is nothing historically that would be comparable.”  Under federal regulations, special prosecutors are appointed in sensitive cases where senior officials may have a conflict of interest. The rules empower the attorney general, not the president, to make the appointment, but Mr. Trump is unlikely to name an attorney general who disagrees with him. A likely candidate, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, delivered a prosecutorial-style speech at the Republican National Convention, inviting the audience to declare Mrs. Clinton “guilty” of endangering national security and lying about it.  Presidents also effectively exercise ultimate authority because they can fire cabinet officials who refuse orders. That was what President Richard M. Nixon did in the so-called Saturday Night Massacre of 1973, when he fired the top two officials in the Justice Department because they refused to fire the special prosecutor investigating Watergate.  If Mr. Trump were president, “he has the power to do it, whether it’s a wise thing to do or not,” said Dick Thornburgh, who served as attorney general in the Ronald Reagan and George Bush administrations.  Jonathan H. Adler, a Case Western Reserve University law professor, noted that presidents of both parties had been centralizing control over executive branch decisions in the White House since the 1980s, and portrayed Mr. Trump’s threat as foreshadowing further fraying of institutional checks and balances.  “The appearance of the justice system being used for partisan payback is poisonous,” he said.  Still, several of the conservatives who were critical of Mr. Trump’s threat also drew a parallel to a statement in June 2008 by Eric H. Holder Jr., who was then an adviser to Senator Barack Obama’s campaign and later became attorney general.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a speech, Mr. Holder denounced the George W. Bush administration as having led the country astray from its “commitment to the Constitution and to the rule of law” after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and declared that “we owe the American people a reckoning.”  Photo  But Mr. Obama later made clear that he opposed investigating Bush administration veterans for the torture of terrorism suspects, saying, “We need to look forward as opposed to looking backwards.”  Still, Mr. Holder decided in August 2009 to open a narrower investigation into whether the C.I.A. abused detainees in ways that went beyond official policy, reopening cases prosecutors closed without charges under the Bush administration. That investigation ended in 2012 without any new charges.  On his Twitter account Sunday night, Mr. Holder pronounced Mr. Trump “dangerous” and “not qualified.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Be afraid of any candidate who says he will order DOJ/FBI to act on his command,” Mr. Holder wrote. Using Mr. Trump’s Twitter account name, he added: “In the USA we do not threaten to jail political opponents. @realDonaldTrump said he would. He is promising to abuse the power of the office.”  In an interview on MSNBC on Monday, Mr. Trump’s running mate, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, rejected a host’s portrayal of the threat as reminiscent of “a third world dictator.”  “Look, I thought that was one of the better moments of the debate last night,” Mr. Pence said, adding: “I think what Donald Trump said is no one’s going to be above the law. There’s going to be no double standards. And he said we’re going to look into and get to the bottom of this, which is, I think, what the American people would fully expect, is an even application of the law.”  Michael B. Mukasey, a former federal judge and attorney general in the George W. Bush administration who has criticized Mrs. Clinton over the email issue, said that if Mr. Trump won, Mr. Obama could eliminate the threat by pre-emptively pardoning her. But he likened Mr. Trump’s threat to what happens in a “banana republic.”  “This is not the way we conduct politics here,” Mr. Mukasey said.
“The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer,” Mr. Trump told supporters around 3 a.m. on Wednesday at a rally in New York City, just after Mrs. Clinton called to concede.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a departure from a blistering campaign in which he repeatedly stoked division, Mr. Trump sought to do something he had conspicuously avoided as a candidate: Appeal for unity.  “Now it’s time for America to bind the wounds of division,” he said. “It is time for us to come together as one united people. It’s time.”  That, he added, “is so important to me.”  He offered unusually warm words for Mrs. Clinton, who he has suggested should be in jail, saying she was owed “a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country.”  Bolstered by Mr. Trump’s strong showing, Republicans retained control of the Senate. Only one Republican-controlled seat, in Illinois, fell to Democrats early in the evening. And Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, a Republican, easily won re-election in a race that had been among the country’s most competitive. A handful of other Republican incumbents facing difficult races were running better than expected.  Mr. Trump’s win — stretching across the battleground states of Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania — seemed likely to set off financial jitters and immediate unease among international allies, many of which were startled when Mr. Trump in his campaign cast doubt on the necessity of America’s military commitments abroad and its allegiance to international economic partnerships.  From the moment he entered the campaign, with a shocking set of claims that Mexican immigrants were rapists and criminals, Mr. Trump was widely underestimated as a candidate, first by his opponents for the Republican nomination and later by Mrs. Clinton, his Democratic rival. His rise was largely missed by polling organizations and data analysts. And an air of improbability trailed his campaign, to the detriment of those who dismissed his angry message, his improvisational style and his appeal to disillusioned voters.  He suggested remedies that raised questions of constitutionality, like a ban on Muslims entering the United States.  He threatened opponents, promising lawsuits against news organizations that covered him critically and women who accused him of sexual assault. At times, he simply lied.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump’s unfiltered rallies and unshakable self-regard attracted a zealous following, fusing unsubtle identity politics with an economic populism that often defied party doctrine.  His rallies — furious, entertaining, heavy on name-calling and nationalist overtones — became the nexus of a political movement, with daily promises of sweeping victory, in the election and otherwise, and an insistence that the country’s political machinery was “rigged” against Mr. Trump and those who admired him.  Video  He seemed to embody the success and grandeur that so many of his followers felt was missing from their own lives — and from the country itself. And he scoffed at the poll-driven word-parsing ways of modern politics, calling them a waste of time and money. Instead, he relied on his gut.  At his victory party at the New York Hilton Midtown, where a raucous crowd indulged in a cash bar and wore hats bearing his ubiquitous campaign slogan “Make America Great Again,” voters expressed gratification that their voices had, at last, been heard.  “He was talking to people who weren’t being spoken to,” said Joseph Gravagna, 37, a marketing company owner from Rockland County, N.Y. “That’s how I knew he was going to win.”  For Mrs. Clinton, the defeat signaled an astonishing end to a political dynasty that has colored Democratic politics for a generation. Eight years after losing to President Obama in the Democratic primary — and 16 years after leaving the White House for the United States Senate, as President Bill Clinton exited office — she had seemed positioned to carry on two legacies: her husband’s and the president’s.  Video  Her shocking loss was a devastating turn for the sprawling world of Clinton aides and strategists who believed they had built an electoral machine that would swamp Mr. Trump’s ragtag band of loyal operatives and family members, many of whom had no experience running a national campaign.  On Tuesday night, stricken Clinton aides who believed that Mr. Trump had no mathematical path to victory, anxiously paced the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center as states in which they were confident of victory, like Florida and North Carolina, either fell to Mr. Trump or seemed in danger of tipping his way.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton watched the grim results roll in from a suite at the nearby Peninsula Hotel, surrounded by her family, friends and advisers who had the day before celebrated her candidacy with a champagne toast on her campaign plane.  But over and over, Mrs. Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate were exposed. She failed to excite voters hungry for change. She struggled to build trust with Americans who were baffled by her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state. And she strained to make a persuasive case for herself as a champion of the economically downtrodden after delivering perfunctory paid speeches that earned her millions of dollars.  The returns Tuesday also amounted to a historic rebuke of the Democratic Party from the white blue-collar voters who had formed the party base from the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt to Mr. Clinton’s. Yet Mrs. Clinton and her advisers had taken for granted that states like Michigan and Wisconsin would stick with a Democratic nominee, and that she could repeat Mr. Obama’s strategy of mobilizing the party’s ascendant liberal coalition rather than pursuing a more moderate course like her husband did 24 years ago.  But not until these voters were offered a Republican who ran as an unapologetic populist, railing against foreign trade deals and illegal immigration, did they move so drastically away from their ancestral political home.  To the surprise of many on the left, white voters who had helped elect the nation’s first black president, appeared more reluctant to line up behind a white woman.  From Pennsylvania to Wisconsin, industrial towns once full of union voters who for decades offered their votes to Democratic presidential candidates, even in the party’s lean years, shifted to Mr. Trump’s Republican Party. One county in the Mahoning Valley of Ohio, Trumbull, went to Mr. Trump by a six-point margin. Four years ago, Mr. Obama won there by 22 points.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mrs. Clinton’s loss was especially crushing to millions who had cheered her march toward history as, they hoped, the nation’s first female president. For supporters, the election often felt like a referendum on gender progress: an opportunity to elevate a woman to the nation’s top job and to repudiate a man whose remarkably boorish behavior toward women had assumed center stage during much of the campaign.  Mr. Trump boasted, in a 2005 video released last month, about using his public profile to commit sexual assault. He suggested that female political rivals lacked a presidential “look.” He ranked women on a scale of one to 10, even holding forth on the desirability of his own daughter — the kind of throwback male behavior that many in the country assumed would disqualify a candidate for high office.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Tuesday, the public’s verdict was rendered.  Uncertainty abounds as Mr. Trump prepares to take office. His campaign featured a shape-shifting list of policy proposals, often seeming to change hour to hour. His staff was in constant turmoil, with Mr. Trump’s children serving critical campaign roles and a rotating cast of advisers alternately seeking access to Mr. Trump’s ear, losing it and, often, regaining it, depending on the day.  Even Mr. Trump’s full embrace of the Republican Party came exceedingly late in life, leaving members of both parties unsure about what he truly believes. He has donated heavily to both parties and has long described his politics as the transactional reality of a businessman.  Mr. Trump’s dozens of business entanglements — many of them in foreign countries — will follow him into the Oval Office, raising questions about potential conflicts of interest. His refusal to release his tax returns, and his acknowledgment that he did not pay federal income taxes for years, has left the American people with considerable gaps in their understanding of the financial dealings.  But this they do know: Mr. Trump will thoroughly reimagine the tone, standards and expectations of the presidency, molding it in his own self-aggrandizing image.  He is set to take the oath of office on Jan. 20.
Mr. Trump, who appeared nervous and uncharacteristically subdued beside Mr. Obama, called the president “a good man.” He said that the meeting was “a great honor” and that their conversation had lasted far longer than he would have expected.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I have great respect,” Mr. Trump said, turning to face Mr. Obama. “We discussed a lot of different situations, some wonderful, and some difficulties. I very much look forward to dealing with the president in the future, including counsel.” Given that Mr. Trump has never held elective office or served in government, some administration aides suggest that Mr. Obama could play a larger-than-usual role in acquainting Mr. Trump with the demands of the office.  “The meeting might’ve been at least a little less awkward than some might have expected,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said. Aides said that the two men discussed foreign and domestic policy issues that Mr. Trump would need to deal with on Day 1 in the Oval Office. As early as Friday, the president-elect will get a version of the President’s Daily Brief, a classified compilation of all threats facing the United States and other highly significant intelligence information.  Photo  Mr. Trump’s trip was surreal for many Republicans and Democrats in Washington, who never expected to see the real estate executive and reality television star in an Oval Office meeting to begin preparations to lead the most powerful nation in the world. Mr. Trump, whose campaign drew support from white supremacist groups, sat just in front of a bust of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the Oval Office.  Outside in the Rose Garden, reporters could see Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, emerge from the West Wing talking in hushed tones with Jared Kushner, the president-elect’s son-in-law and adviser. The two then headed off for a stroll around the South Lawn. Nearby, aides to Mr. Trump snapped photographs of one another in the White House colonnade, standing in the spot where a crowd of shocked White House aides, some openly crying, had watched the day before as Mr. Obama called for national unity after Mr. Trump’s victory.  The Oval Office meeting was the centerpiece of a marathon day in the capital for Mr. Trump, his first since winning the presidency. His wife, Melania, had tea with Michelle Obama in the White House residence and took in the view of the Washington Monument from the Truman Balcony. White House aides said the two women talked about raising children in the White House.  “We want to make sure that they feel welcome as they prepare to make this transition,” Mr. Obama said of the Trumps.  Later on Capitol Hill, after meeting with Republican congressional leaders who will hold sway over enacting his agenda, Mr. Trump strode with Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the House speaker, to a balcony overlooking the platform on the west side of the Capitol where he will be sworn in on Jan. 20, 2017, peering out to the National Mall below.  “Really, really beautiful,” he said of the view.  The president-elect arrived in the late morning from New York at Reagan National Airport in his trademark jet with the name Trump emblazoned on its side, and then rode with his wife in a black, armored sport utility vehicle in a motorcade that moved swiftly through Washington. By midafternoon, crowds had gathered on a crisp autumn day on both sides of Pennsylvania Avenue next to the Trump International Hotel, where barricades were set up. Police officers were lined up on motorcycles, officers on horses patrolled the area, and tourists taking photographs mingled with camera crews.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump and his wife had lunch with Mr. Ryan at the Capitol Hill Club, a peace summit meeting after Mr. Ryan had offered tepid support for the Republican nominee during the campaign and Mr. Trump had branded him a “weak and ineffective leader,” threatening retribution.  Photo  Later, after a meeting in Mr. Ryan’s office in the Capitol, Mr. Trump said that he was excited to begin carrying out an agenda to address immigration, health care and tax cuts. Investors, apparently buoyed by the prospect of those tax cuts as well as increased infrastructure spending, sent the Dow Jones industrial average to a record high on Thursday.  “We’re going to do some absolutely spectacular things for the American people,” Mr. Trump said. “We’re going to lower taxes, as you know, we’re going to fix health care and make it more affordable and better. We’re going to do a real job for the public.”  Mr. Trump also met for about an hour with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader.  “We are looking at jobs,” Mr. Trump told reporters as he left. “Big-league jobs.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The meetings unfolded as members of Mr. Obama’s staff were starting the business of handing over the vast bureaucracy of the federal government to Mr. Trump’s staff. Speculation swirled over possible appointments in the Trump administration, with Stephen K. Bannon, the conservative provocateur and Mr. Trump’s campaign chief, and Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chairman, being mentioned as possible picks for chief of staff.  Top advisers to Mr. Obama have spent months preparing for the transition, a complex venture condensed into the 72 -days before the inauguration. It is up to them and the Trump team to set it in motion, pairing Obama administration staff members with representatives of the president-elect for crash courses in the workings of the White House and federal agencies.  Mr. Obama said Wednesday that he had instructed his staff to follow the example set by President George W. Bush in 2008 and provide a professional and smooth transition for Mr. Trump’s team, despite the policy differences that separate the president and his successor. For all the public drama and division of the presidential campaign, Mr. Obama’s aides have since July been quietly working with advisers to Hillary Clinton and Mr. Trump to plan for the passing of power.  But the crush of information may be onerous, particularly when it comes to Mr. Trump’s task of hiring 4,000 political appointees over a matter of weeks. Saddled with an antiquated personnel system when Mr. Obama was elected in 2008, his aides moved this year to build a new one designed to make it easier to track the positions, as well as the applicants and their personal and professional information.  In December, Mr. Obama’s team plans to hold the first of two war-gaming exercises to prepare Mr. Trump and his staff for a potential national security crisis. The second simulation for Mr. Trump is set for January, days before he officially gains access to the nuclear codes.
On Thursday, Mr. Ryan appeared to be cautiously leaning in the direction of a growing group of Republicans who have decided that embracing Mr. Trump is their best defense against Democrats maintaining the White House for another four years. “Going forward, we’re going to go a little deeper in the policy weeds to make sure we have a better understanding of one another,” Mr. Ryan said.  Video  “It was important that we discussed our differences that we have,” Mr. Ryan said in a news conference. “But it was also important that we discuss the core principles that tie us together.”  Mr. Trump also met with the broader House leadership team and with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, and his staff, a meeting the Trump campaign had requested. In wide-ranging discussions that touched on trade, abortion, Supreme Court justices and tax policy, several lawmakers said they stressed to Mr. Trump the need to have a unified policy agenda and made gentle suggestions on how to change his tone, to recapture the White House and to prevent damage to Republican candidates down the ballot.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On immigration, in particular, Mr. Trump was told that “there is a way to talk about issues that people don’t find offensive,” Senator John Cornyn of Texas said.  Mr. Ryan and Mr. Trump met at the Republican National Committee for 45 minutes on Thursday morning, with Reince Priebus, the committee’s chairman, as their chaperone.  Mr. Ryan gave no public signal that he was poised to back Mr. Trump, and two people briefed on their private meeting said they did not discuss a possible endorsement. Mr. Ryan told Mr. Trump that while he wanted to support him, their staff members must keep talking, people briefed on the conversation said.  But in effusive remarks after the sit-down, Mr. Ryan insisted that the party leadership was not on the brink of an irreparable split.  Photo  “Donald Trump and I have had our differences — we talked about those differences today,” Mr. Ryan said, adding, “I do believe that we are now planting the seeds to get ourselves unified.”  With his conciliatory language toward Mr. Trump, Mr. Ryan embarked on a perilous gamble with the volatile force of the businessman’s personality — which the speaker characterized as “very good” — and with Mr. Trump’s shape-shifting on policy.  While Mr. Ryan noted that Mr. Trump had expressed openness to his policy positions, about 12 hours earlier Mr. Trump had called for an increase in the federal minimum wage, as part of a series of insulting Twitter messages aimed at Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts.  Mr. Ryan, along with other Republicans who sounded even more won over by Mr. Trump on Thursday, risks getting on board with one Trump, only to possibly find a new version making statements he finds untenable, even repugnant, weeks or months later.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I totally endorse him,” said Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, where Mr. Trump is viewed largely unfavorably. “Judge him by his children,” Mr. Hatch said, noting that Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, attended the meeting with senators. The focus of the agenda, Mr. Hatch said, was trade, tax policy and immigration, adding that Mr. Trump mostly listened.  Mr. Ryan’s remarks are likely to help ease the friction between the two camps, at least for the moment, and perhaps to buy the speaker and his conference some time as they decide how to handle their new standard-bearer.  Video  Mr. Trump, too, ratcheted down his criticism of Mr. Ryan. In an interview later Thursday on Fox News, Mr. Trump said that he viewed their meeting as a success, and that he was willing to be patient in order to bring the party’s factions together. “I don’t mind going through a little bit of a slow process,” Mr. Trump said, noting that he and Mr. Ryan had discussed judicial nominations in their sit-down.  Seeming to hint at some areas of disagreement with Mr. Ryan, Mr. Trump added that trade and border security were two issues he felt “very strongly about.”  Conflicting forces have tugged at Mr. Ryan since Mr. Trump emerged as the presumptive nominee. Within the Republican conference, there is a growing group of lawmakers who have endorsed Mr. Trump, but also a number of Republicans in difficult re-election races who want the freedom to break openly with their party’s candidate for president. And opposition to Mr. Trump runs high among political donors and conservative intellectuals supportive of Mr. Ryan and his agenda.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The next step, Mr. Ryan said, would be to “go deeper into the policy areas” where there may be disagreements between congressional Republicans and Mr. Trump. Should Mr. Trump defy Mr. Ryan on policy, the speaker has so far reserved the right to back away from their uneasy relationship.  Mr. Trump’s pilgrimage to Washington posed a critical test for his candidacy at the onset of the general election campaign. Without the blessing of Republican leaders in Congress, Mr. Trump could be frozen out by major party donors and viewed with even deeper suspicion by the middle-of-the-road voters he would need to compete against his likely Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton.  In a gesture uncharacteristic of Mr. Trump’s campaign, he also spoke by phone on Wednesday with Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, an implacable Trump critic whom Mr. Trump has savaged in the past. Mr. Graham released a statement Thursday saying they had a “good 15-minute discussion,” mainly on matters of national security, though his own vow not to vote for Mr. Trump remained unchanged.  As the meetings began Thursday, Democrats commenced with a bit of political parallel play, mocking Mr. Trump and trying hard to tie Republican members of Congress to his more contentious statements. “Since Senator McConnell has so enthusiastically embraced Trump,” Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, said on the Senate floor Thursday, “we can only assume he agrees with Trump’s view that women are dogs and pigs.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In some respects, Mr. Trump’s meetings with Mr. Ryan and the Senate leaders resemble a kind of custody negotiation between estranged parents, with the Republican Party caught in the middle. Intense distrust plagues the relationship, rooted in a fundamental divergence of worldview and exacerbated by petty slights during the 2016 primary race.  Yet, for Mr. Trump and the congressional leaders, the political incentives are heavily in favor of conciliation — or at least the appearance of good will. Despite considerable differences on matters of policy and campaign strategy, it is in no one’s interest for them to air those disagreements continually.  Mr. Trump said he did not aim to change the party platform, a commitment one Trump adviser had described beforehand as a potential “give point” in the talks. Indeed, Mr. McConnell will choose the person who actually writes the party platform, and will probably have more control than Mr. Trump on that front unless Mr. Trump chooses to push back.  At the same time, it seemed increasingly clear that some Republicans, noting the popularity of Mr. Trump’s anti-free-trade message across the country, may be open to accommodating his point of view.  “It certainly is causing people to look at the broader implications of trade agreements,” said Senator Susan Collins of Maine. Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee also said that the resonance of Mr. Trump’s policy messages could no longer be ignored.  “We need to listen to the people,” he said.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Even as President-elect Donald J. Trump vows to unify a divided nation, he faces a momentous decision over whether to make good on his oft-repeated campaign pledge to have a special prosecutor “lock up” Hillary Clinton.  That decision will signal whether Mr. Trump intends to look ahead and “bind the wounds of division,” as he pledged to do in his acceptance speech early Wednesday, or look back and settle political scores, as he often seemed inclined to do during his campaign.  The possibility of a new investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s email server has forced the White House to field questions about whether President Obama might offer Mrs. Clinton a pardon to insulate her from criminal charges.  Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman, said last week that he would not discuss Mr. Obama’s thinking on any particular case for clemency, but he sent a strong signal that it would be inappropriate for Mr. Trump to revive the Clinton investigation.  He told reporters that the country had a long tradition of political leaders’ “not using the criminal justice system to exact political revenge.” Mr. Earnest said that “in fact, we go to great lengths to insulate our criminal justice system from partisan politics,” adding that “the president is hopeful that it will continue.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Chants of “lock her up” became a frequent rallying cry at Trump campaign events, and Mr. Trump told Mrs. Clinton at the second presidential debate that if elected, he would instruct his attorney general “to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation because there has never been so many lies, so much deception.”  If he were president, he told her, “you’d be in jail.” That threat unnerved both Republican and Democratic legal analysts.  The decision he faces echoes one confronted by Mr. Obama and his first attorney general, Eric H. Holder Jr., over whether to investigate Bush administration officials for extreme interrogation tactics against terrorism suspects that the Obama administration later deemed to be torture.  While Mr. Holder said the country was owed “a reckoning” for torture carried out after the Sept. 11 attacks, the Obama administration ultimately did not conduct a broad criminal investigation. Mr. Obama declared that “we need to look forward, as opposed to looking backwards.”  The F.B.I. has concluded two times, including after a surprise review that began just 11 days before the election, that Mrs. Clinton should not face criminal prosecution over her handling of her private email server. Mrs. Clinton on Saturday blamed her loss in part on the F.B.I.’s last-minute intervention.  Even so, legal analysts said there was little doubt that as president, Mr. Trump would have the power to direct his attorney general — Rudolph W. Giuliani has been frequently mentioned for the job — to appoint an outside special counsel to reinvestigate the matter in light of new evidence that may have developed.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In an interview with The Wall Street Journal that was published on Friday, Mr. Trump deflected a question about naming a special prosecutor.  “It’s not something I’ve given a lot of thought, because I want to solve health care, jobs, border control, tax reform,” he said.  But his top aides have left the door open to such a move.  In an appearance Thursday on Fox News, Mr. Giuliani — a top adviser to Mr. Trump on legal and national security issues — said he did not think that Mr. Obama should pardon Mrs. Clinton, and he raised the prospect that the Trump administration could investigate not only the private email server, but also the Clinton Foundation, the family charity. Several F.B.I. offices are known to have examined questions about the charity’s acceptance of gifts from foreign leaders, but those inquiries appear to have been paused.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Giuliani said that during the campaign Mr. Trump had “talked about an independent counsel doing it, who would be not a Republican, not a Democrat, somebody free of any political question.”  The decision about appointing a special prosecutor is a “tough” one, Mr. Giuliani said in a separate appearance on CNN. “It’s been a tradition in our politics to put things behind us,” he said. “On the other hand, you have to look at, how bad was it?”  Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, has also not ruled out a special counsel investigation, saying a decision would come “all in good time.”  But Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who is also a Trump adviser, seemed to discourage talk of prosecuting Mrs. Clinton when he was asked about it Thursday on NBC’s “Today” show. “People get to speak through their vote, and they voted for Donald Trump to be the president of the United States,” Mr. Christie said. “It is now his job, and I am confident he will bring the country together.”  However, Mr. Christie’s influence in the Trump camp appears to be waning. A day after that interview, he was demoted from chief of the Trump transition team in favor of Vice President-elect Mike Pence. Mr. Christie was made a vice chairman.  Democrats say the lingering threats to “lock up” Mrs. Clinton are alarming. They say they hope that Mr. Trump, who has already shown signs of backing away from other campaign pledges, most notably his vow to repeal the Affordable Care Act entirely, will do the same when it comes to threats of prosecuting his defeated rival.  “It would be very, very unwise, in my view, for a new attorney general, acting presumably on the orders of the president, to start out a new administration on this note,” Richard Ben-Veniste, a prominent Democratic lawyer in Washington, said in a telephone interview. “It would be mimicking the tin-pot dictators of historical disgrace who seek to punish those who have run against them.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, told Congress on Sunday that he had seen no evidence in a recently discovered trove of emails to change his conclusion that Hillary Clinton should face no charges over her handling of classified information.  Mr. Comey’s announcement, just two days before the election, was an effort to clear the cloud of suspicion he had publicly placed over her presidential campaign late last month when he alerted Congress that the F.B.I. would examine the emails.  “Based on our review, we have not changed our conclusions that we expressed in July with respect to Secretary Clinton,” Mr. Comey wrote in a letter to the leaders of several congressional committees. He said agents had reviewed all communications to and from Mrs. Clinton in the new trove from when she was secretary of state.  The letter was a dramatic final twist in a tumultuous nine days for both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Comey, who drew widespread criticism for announcing that the F.B.I. had discovered new emails that might be relevant to its investigation of Mrs. Clinton, which ended in July with no charges. That criticism of Mr. Comey from both parties is likely to persist after the election.  While the new letter was clear as it related to Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Comey’s message was otherwise vague. He did not say that agents had completed their review of the emails, or that they were abandoning the matter in regard to her aides. But federal law enforcement officials said that they considered the review of emails related to Mrs. Clinton’s server complete, and that Mr. Comey’s letter was intended to convey that.  One senior law enforcement official said that as recently as Friday, it was not clear whether the review would be completed by Election Day. But after days of working in shifts around the clock, teams of counterintelligence agents and technology specialists at the bureau’s headquarters in Washington finished their examination of the thousands of emails. Officials had decided to make their decision public as soon as they had reached it, to avoid any suggestion that they were suppressing information.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  According to the law enforcement official, many of the emails were personal messages or duplicates of ones that the bureau had previously examined during the original inquiry.  Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, said in a post on Twitter that the campaign had always believed she would be cleared of any wrongdoing.  “We were always confident nothing would cause the July decision to be revisited,” Mr. Fallon said. “Now Director Comey has confirmed it.”  Kellyanne Conway, Donald J. Trump’s campaign manager, lamented the fact that Mr. Comey had again inserted himself into the election, but she predicted that his conclusion would have no effect on the outcome.  “The investigation has been mishandled from the beginning,” Ms. Conway said on MSNBC, arguing that Mrs. Clinton had wasted taxpayer money and federal resources because of her email practices. “She was reckless, she was careless, she was selfish.”  The new review began after agents discovered a cache of emails in early October in an unrelated investigation into the disgraced former congressman Anthony D. Weiner, the estranged husband of one of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides. When searching Mr. Weiner’s laptop for evidence of whether he had exchanged illicit messages with a teenage girl, they discovered emails belonging to the aide, Huma Abedin.  That announcement renewed talk of an investigation that had shadowed Mrs. Clinton for much of the Democratic primary campaign. She and her aides had been under investigation for improperly storing classified information on Mrs. Clinton’s private email server. The discovery of new emails raised the prospect that the laptop might have new information that would renew the F.B.I. inquiry.  Federal law enforcement officials had said for the past week that only something astounding would change their conclusion that nobody should be charged. But the mere potential for legal trouble was enough to make Republicans gleeful, and Mr. Trump highlighted the F.B.I.’s actions in campaign ads.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the end of a rocky week for Mrs. Clinton that included wild, false speculation about looming indictments and shocking discoveries in the emails, Mr. Comey’s letter swept away her largest and most immediate problem.  Republicans immediately accused Mr. Comey of making his announcement prematurely. “Comey must be under enormous political pressure to cave like this and announce something he can’t possibly know,” Newt Gingrich, a Trump adviser, wrote on Twitter.  Mr. Comey’s move is also sure to prompt questions from Democrats. Most important among them: Why did Mr. Comey raise the specter of wrongdoing before agents had even read the emails, especially since it took only days to determine that they were not significant?  Just hours before Mr. Comey sent the letter to Capitol Hill, Senate Democrats said hearings should be held to examine how Mr. Comey had handled the matter. After the letter’s release, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the Justice Department “needs to take a look at its procedures to prevent similar actions that could influence future elections.”  “There’s no doubt that it created a false impression about the nature of the agency’s inquiry,” she added.  The F.B.I. director’s vague, brief announcement on Oct. 28 left Mrs. Clinton with few details to rebut and little time to do it. Many current and former F.B.I. agents and Justice Department officials said Mr. Comey had needlessly plunged the F.B.I. into the politics of a presidential election, with no clear way out.  A long list of former Justice Department officials, including Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., chided Mr. Comey. Despite the fact that the bureau did not find anything that changed its original conclusion about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Comey has insisted that he had no choice but to inform Congress about the new emails because the investigation had been completed and he had pledged transparency, according to senior F.B.I. officials.  Because of Mr. Comey’s Oct. 28 letter, Attorney General Loretta Lynch made completing a review of the emails a top priority. Late last month, Mr. Comey ordered agents to work around the clock to sift through the messages. That process, senior F.B.I. officials said, was painstaking, because each message that had been sent to Mrs. Clinton had to be reviewed to determine whether it had sensitive national security materials.  In Mr. Comey’s short letter to Congress on Sunday, he said he was “very grateful to the professionals at the F.B.I. for doing an extraordinary amount of high-quality work in a short period of time.”
Mrs. Clinton has sidestepped questions about whether, if she is elected, she intends to keep Mr. Comey in his job. Her surrogates and supporters say firing him, while legal, would be politically impossible.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The political cost of firing him is greater than the political cost of keeping him,” said James M. Cole, who recently served as deputy attorney general and who signed a Clinton campaign letter criticizing Mr. Comey.  That sets the stage for a Clinton presidency that opens with tension in one of the president’s most important relationships. The strain would not be a new one. J. Edgar Hoover, the bureau’s first director, was almost fired by more than a few of the six presidents he served under. More recently, President Bill Clinton and his director, Louis Freeh, were barely on speaking terms.  But such a relationship would be untenable in today’s F.B.I., which since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks has become essential to counterterrorism efforts around the world. That is why people close to Mr. Comey say the next president will move quickly past the rancor of the past few weeks.  “The national security area is one where they will be bound,” said Daniel C. Richman, a close adviser to Mr. Comey who worked with him as a federal prosecutor in New York in the 1980s. “It will be something that will enable them to bond.”  Said another way: A national crisis has a way of making political grievances seem less important.  For now, though, this grievance is particularly raw and there is little historical precedent for it. Incoming presidents have criticized F.B.I. directors before, but rarely so forcefully or publicly. As a candidate, Jimmy Carter said he “would have” fired Clarence M. Kelley, the director at the time, for accepting gifts and services from his staff members. He declined to say, though, whether as president he would indeed fire Mr. Kelley. And he did not.  By contrast, Democrats rallying behind Mrs. Clinton have made a late-campaign strategy out of fueling outrage at the F.B.I. The campaign published an open letter, signed by dozens of former prosecutors, chastising Mr. Comey. President Obama criticized him. The House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, hinted that he might be pushed from office.  “Maybe he’s not in the right job,” Ms. Pelosi told CNN. “I think that we have to just get through this election and just see what the casualties are along the way.”  Mrs. Clinton’s running mate, Senator Tim Kaine, said in an interview on Saturday with Fusion that Mr. Comey had violated F.B.I. protocol by discussing details of an investigation, but that he did not believe Mr. Comey was trying to affect the election.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Kaine said that recent disclosures in the news media showed that “the F.B.I. is not only a leaky sieve but there were people within the F.B.I. actively working — actively working — to try to help the Trump campaign.” He called it “a massive blow to the integrity of” the bureau.  Mr. Comey ignited criticism for announcing, over the objection of the Justice Department, that F.B.I. agents had discovered new emails that might — or might not — be relevant to an investigation that was completed in July into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server to send classified information.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  People close to Mr. Comey say his move could actually help Mrs. Clinton if she wins. Only an independent-minded F.B.I. director, one who has shown no loyalty to Mrs. Clinton and a fierce commitment to transparency, their argument goes, will have the credibility to handle what are sure to be years of accusations of Clinton wrongdoing from Republican lawmakers.  Then there is the matter of Mrs. Clinton’s family foundation. Keeping accusations about the foundation in the news has been a key Republican strategy to weaken Mrs. Clinton, and the F.B.I. office in New York began a preliminary investigation into it over the summer. Some agents there believe strongly that there is evidence to move forward with subpoenas, a move that has been on hold as part of longstanding policy to not do anything that could influence an election — a policy officials say Mr. Comey violated.  After the election, however, authorities will most likely revisit that decision. Senior F.B.I. and Justice Department officials, including Mr. Comey, have characterized the evidence — and the investigation — as weak, according to several law enforcement officials familiar with the case. They see the case as based on little more than information from “Clinton Cash,” a book by Peter Schweizer that asserted that foreign entities gave money to former President Bill Clinton and the Clinton Foundation, and in return received favors from the State Department.  F.B.I. agents, like many law enforcement officers, are often conservative-leaning. And many of today’s agents came up in the bureau during the 1990s, an era of special prosecutors and mutual distrust between the Clinton White House and the F.B.I. Institutionally, though, the F.B.I. prides itself on nonpartisanship. It investigates public corruption in both parties with equal zeal and has rules and traditions that protect against partisan meddling.  Mr. Comey’s move, and the series of news stories that followed about politically charged investigations, have led to accusations that those rules and traditions had been cast aside.  When the F.B.I. last week published 15-year-old documents about, among other things, President Clinton’s pardon of the financier Marc Rich, the redacted records offered little information but renewed discussion of long-ago Clinton-related controversies, F.B.I. officials said the timing was a coincidence; the requests for the documents had been filed months ago. But it seemed to confirm the suspicions among Democrats that the F.B.I. was out to hurt Mrs. Clinton, a suggestion F.B.I. agents bristle at.  Mr. Comey has sought to position himself as a fiercely independent director who is willing to speak his mind on issues of race, policing and encryption, even when his views are not shared at the Justice Department or the White House. The result has been a much higher profile for Mr. Comey than that of his predecessor, Robert Mueller, as well as for his more low-key boss, Attorney General Loretta Lynch.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Many current and former Justice Department officials expressed dismay that Ms. Lynch did not personally call Mr. Comey and order him, on principle, not to disclose the latest investigative steps in the email case so close to the election.  There has been some speculation that Mr. Comey would feel compelled to provide details on the status of the investigation into the new cache of emails before Election Day. But that move, which would have been controversial within the F.B.I., is now unlikely.  “Damn the election,” said James McJunkin, a former F.B.I. assistant director, echoing the feeling of other agents. “He has to conduct the investigation without the politics. That’s the important piece. That is something he already knows. That’s not lost on James Comey.”
The parallels to Hoover, who ran the F.B.I. and its predecessor from 1924 to 1972 as a fief that reflected his personal and political views, may be quite a stretch. People who know Mr. Comey well dismiss out of hand the notion that he acted to tip the election to either Mrs. Clinton or Donald J. Trump. If he is guilty of anything, they say, it may be a sort of moral hubris, a desire to put his rectitude and incorruptibility on public display.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After all, Mr. Comey first came to wide public attention for his role in a 2004 drama at the hospital bedside of John Ashcroft, then the attorney general. Acting in place of the ailing Mr. Ashcroft, Mr. Comey had refused to sign off on the reauthorization of National Security Agency surveillance programs that he believed were legally flawed. When he heard two top aides to President George W. Bush planned to have Mr. Ashcroft sign the reauthorization, Mr. Comey sped to the hospital to head them off. It was a rare Washington drama that has often been recounted, usually with Mr. Comey as the heroic agent of justice.  But before Mr. Comey, Hoover was the last F.B.I. director to be accused — at least by some historians — of trying to influence a presidential election, by feeding useful scraps of information on Harry S. Truman, a Democrat, to the campaign of Thomas E. Dewey, a Republican.  To his critics, Mr. Comey has twice flagrantly violated the longstanding norms of law enforcement, politicizing the F.B.I. by injecting it into a hard-fought election. His defenders say the controversy may simply show the difficulty of running a law enforcement organization as a purely professional, apolitical endeavor in an election year awash in political passions, suspicions and accusations. (Just ask Loretta E. Lynch, Mr. Comey’s boss as attorney general, who said after an airport encounter with former President Bill Clinton that drew Republican criticism that she would accept whatever the F.B.I. recommended on the Clinton email inquiry.)  Several F.B.I. directors have found themselves tangled in politicized disputes — Louis J. Freeh, the director from 1993 to 2001, had a contentious relationship with Mr. Clinton. But in the Hoover years, the bureau was a deeply political instrument. Hoover’s personal crusade against communists, real and imagined, his targeting of antiwar and civil rights activists, and his use of F.B.I. files to pressure or blackmail other officials — sometimes including presidents — defined the bureau for decades.  “The bureau played a very important role behind the scenes in shaping American politics during the Cold War,” said Athan G. Theoharis, a professor emeritus at Marquette University and a historian of the F.B.I. “When you have a secret agency that uses its huge resources to influence politics, that’s a dangerous thing.”  The actions that have put Mr. Comey in the spotlight, however unusual, are starkly different from Hoover’s secret maneuverings. Indeed, it may be his determination to be the anti-Hoover, transparent and above politics, that has gotten Mr. Comey in hot water, first with Republicans and now with Democrats.  Photo  Unlike Hoover’s clandestine efforts for Dewey in the 1948 campaign, Mr. Comey’s actions have been very public and directly related to legitimate F.B.I. business.  In July, at a news conference that some former prosecutors now characterize as a mistake, he announced that Mrs. Clinton would not be charged in connection with her use of a private email server, but added that he believed her conduct was “extremely careless.” On Friday, he announced that agents had found additional emails that might be relevant to the investigation, raising the possibility that Mrs. Clinton’s exoneration had been premature.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  While Hoover acted to further the fortunes of one candidate, Mr. Comey has been accused, at different times, of seeking to help both sides. Overnight, the F.B.I. director went from being vilified by supporters of Mr. Trump for covering up Mrs. Clinton’s supposed wrongdoing, to coming under attack from backers of Mrs. Clinton for what they said was his improperly handing political ammunition to Mr. Trump.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As F.B.I. director, Mr. Comey was faced with a rare phenomenon: a criminal investigation of a leading candidate for president. He responded in July with a rare display of openness about an investigation, saying, “I am going to include more detail about our process than I ordinarily would, because I think the American people deserve those details in a case of intense public interest.”  He even testified to Congress in September about the inquiry and was grilled by Republicans. Pressed by Representative Lamar Smith, Republican of Texas, Mr. Comey offered a seemingly obvious promise: “We would certainly look at any new and substantial information.”  Then an unrelated investigation of Anthony D. Weiner, a former congressman from New York and the estranged husband of Huma Abedin, a top Clinton aide, led to an archive of emails that agents thought might be relevant to the Clinton email matter. Mr. Comey, in an email of his own to the F.B.I. work force, made clear that he felt his July statement necessitated another public disclosure.  “We don’t ordinarily tell Congress about ongoing investigations, but here I feel an obligation to do so given that I testified repeatedly in recent months that our investigation was completed,” Mr. Comey wrote. Going public the first time, he suggested, forced him to go public a second time.  By Justice Department convention, however, Mr. Comey’s repeated public statements may have been a mistake.  Stephen Gillers, a professor at New York University School of Law who specializes in legal ethics, said Mr. Comey would have been justified had he simply announced that the Clinton investigation was over. But his first mistake, Mr. Gillers said, was to go further and criticize her sloppy handling of email.  “If you decide not to go ahead with a case, you don’t say bad things about a person you have been investigating because there is no forum in which that person can defend themselves,” said Mr. Gillers, a Democrat. “He made a terrible, terrible error.”  With his recent statement, Mr. Gillers said, Mr. Comey again exceeded his authority and “got himself in deeper.” He should have said nothing, Mr. Gillers said. Instead, “he injected himself into a political campaign.”  Michael Chertoff, a Republican who led the Justice Department’s criminal division under Mr. Bush but who supports Mrs. Clinton, said Mr. Comey violated longstanding department rules and practices in July and again Friday.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In doing so, Mr. Chertoff said, he has provided “fodder for a lot of unsubstantiated allegations and half-baked accusations.”
By late Friday, Mr. Comey felt it necessary to further explain his actions in an email to F.B.I. employees in which he acknowledged that “there is significant risk of being misunderstood.” He explained that he was trying to balance the obligation he felt to tell Congress that the investigation he had said was completed was continuing, with not knowing yet “the significance of this newly discovered collection of emails.”  Across Pennsylvania Avenue from the F.B.I., Justice Department officials were said to be deeply upset about Mr. Comey’s decision to go to Congress with the new information before it had been adequately investigated.  That decision, said several officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity, appeared to contradict longstanding Justice Department guidelines discouraging any actions close to an election that could influence the outcome.  One official complained that no one at the F.B.I. or the Justice Department is even certain yet whether any of the emails included national security material or was relevant to the investigation into whether Mrs. Clinton had mishandled classified material in her use of a private email server.  “The F.B.I. has a history of extreme caution near Election Day so as not to influence the results,” Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said in a statement. “Today’s break from that tradition is appalling.”  “Was this information Congress needed to know urgently? Of course not,” said Matthew Miller, a Clinton supporter who was the chief spokesman at the Justice Department under former Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr.  Some Republicans praised Mr. Comey on Friday for his integrity and independence in coming forward with the new information. But praise was largely drowned out by criticism, with even some of Mrs. Clinton’s biggest opponents upset at Mr. Comey’s sudden re-emergence in what they said was a bungled case.  “This is as bad for Comey as it is for Hillary,” said Tom Fitton, the president of Judicial Watch, a conservative advocacy group that has successfully sued for access to thousands of Mrs. Clinton’s private emails.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Fitton said the cryptic nature of Mr. Comey’s letter to Congress begged for an explanation of what new material the F.B.I. had found, whether it involved national security material relevant to the initial investigation, and why it was not found earlier.  “This letter raises all sorts of questions that Comey and the F.B.I. should have to answer,” Mr. Fitton said. “They can’t roll this out in the middle of a presidential campaign and just leave it at that.”  F.B.I. officials said Mr. Comey was well aware that his decision would draw fire from many sides. Mr. Comey — who at 6-foot-8 is a dominating and charismatic figure — has not shied from the public spotlight and has shown an independent streak throughout his career.  As deputy attorney general in the George W. Bush administration, he butted heads with top White House officials for his refusal to sign on to a National Security Agency surveillance program. And he clashed with Mr. Obama and other administration officials last year over what he saw as a “Ferguson effect” discouraging the police from actively pursuing suspects.  The investigation of Mrs. Clinton and her aides has been a major reason the bureau, more than at any time since at least the Watergate era, has been drawn uncomfortably into a presidential campaign.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Comey and his aides had hoped to put the Clinton email controversy behind them this summer, when he decided — in unusually public fashion — not to seek criminal charges against Mrs. Clinton or anyone else after a yearlong investigation.  But tensions have lingered, with Mr. Comey facing sharp second-guessing from Republicans on Capitol Hill and continuing questions from even his allies.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  This month, when the moderator at a conference of police chiefs in San Diego asked him about the email controversy, Mr. Comey turned the question into a laugh line. “I appreciate you bringing it up,” he deadpanned. “That’s behind us. Nobody really cares anymore.” The chiefs responded with knowing laughter.  Mr. Comey got so many calls from former agents and others after he decided this summer not to pursue charges that he had to change his phone number posted online. And at a recent meeting with retired agents, he was still fielding tough questions about the decision.  “I have no patience for suggestions that we conducted ourselves as anything but what we are — honest, competent, and independent,” Mr. Comey wrote in a September email to employees. “Those suggesting that we are ‘political’ or part of some ‘fix’ either don’t know us, or they are full of baloney (and maybe some of both).”  But while the relentless Republican criticism of Mr. Comey’s decision not to bring charges against Mrs. Clinton has received the most attention, both Democrats and Republicans have sought to help their presidential candidates, demanding investigations into their rivals one moment, then slamming Mr. Comey the next.  In recent months, the F.B.I. has dealt with the fallout from the email decision, wrestled with whether to pursue tips about the Clinton family foundation and opened a wide-ranging counterintelligence case into whether Russia is trying to influence the election. Just this week, the F.B.I. defended itself from accusations that Democrats had curried favor with the deputy director by making donations to his wife’s failed State Senate campaign in Virginia.  F.B.I. agents say their community meetings invariably lead to questions about what the bureau is or is not doing in connection with the election. Mr. Comey has urged his agents to stay above the fray. But many of them worry that regardless of the election’s outcome, the F.B.I. might end up the loser.
WASHINGTON — Donald Trump isn't going to rip up the Iran nuclear deal on day one as president, but his vows to renegotiate the terms and increase enforcement could imperil an agreement that has put off the threat of Tehran developing atomic weapons. Emboldened Republican lawmakers are already considering ways to test Iran's resolve to live up to the deal.  As a candidate, Trump issued a variety of statements about last year's pact. He called it "stupid," a "lopsided disgrace" and the "worst deal ever negotiated," railing against its time-limited restrictions on Iran's enrichment of uranium and other nuclear activity, and exaggerating the scale of U.S. concessions.  Trump said that he doesn't want to simply tear up the agreement. Instead, he spoke of reopening the diplomacy and declared that unlike President Barack Obama's diplomats, he would have been prepared to walk away from talks.  Trump's exact plans are vague, however, and a renegotiation would be difficult. Iran has little incentive to open talks over a deal it is satisfied with. And none of the other countries in the seven-nation accord has expressed interest in picking apart an understanding that took more than a decade of stop-and-go diplomacy and almost two full years of negotiation to complete.  As Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has said: If the U.S. tears up the agreement, "we will light it on fire." President Hassan Rouhani said this week no country could simply change what was agreed, pointing to a U.N. Security Council resolution that endorsed the package.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The deal, which went into effect in January, forced Iran to pull back from the brink of nuclear weapons capacity in exchange for an end to many of the U.S. and European sanctions that devastated Iran's economy. It has been largely respected despite undiminished U.S.-Iranian tensions throughout the Middle East, including their support for rival sides in Syria and Yemen's civil wars.  Each side has leverage: Iran doesn't want a new onslaught of U.S.-led economic pressure and America would be alarmed by any Iranian escalation of its nuclear program. But the accord rests on fragile ground, with powerful constituencies in Washington and Tehran vehemently opposed and looking for any excuse to break it apart. In such a climate, it's unclear what Trump's demands for a renegotiation might mean.  "The agreement is valid only as long as all parties uphold it," State Department spokesman Mark Toner acknowledged Wednesday in the agency's first briefing since Trump's stunning election victory over Hillary Clinton to become the 45th president.  Last summer, Walid Phares, a Trump adviser on the Middle East, said Trump wouldn't pull out of an agreement with America's "institutional signature," but rather revise elements through one-on-one negotiations with Iran or with a larger grouping of allies.  Daryl Kimball, executive director of the pro-deal Arms Control Association, said that re-litigating the deal would unsettle American allies, with no clear picture of what Trump would be trying to accomplish.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Trump could also send the deal to Congress, whose Republican majority has opposed it.  GOP lawmakers are examining a slew of possible actions. Among the likeliest pieces of legislation is one targeting sectors of Iran's economy supporting ballistic missile work, including those specifically exempted from sanctions under the nuclear deal. Another goes after Iran's Revolutionary Guard for its military activity in Syria and support of terrorism.  Iran could use either as an excuse to push past the limits of the nuclear deal, which may partly explain Republican motivations.  Trump has largely avoided talk of killing the agreement, but has said he would police the deal "so tough they don't have a chance."  The U.N. nuclear agency has confirmed minor Iranian violations, specifically on its stockpiling of heavy water that can be used in plutonium production. It has faced no punishment. Iran also has repeatedly breached a ballistic missile ban that was extended for eight years under the nuclear deal, prompting some limited sanctions from Washington.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Obama administration has been hamstrung. Determined to protect the president's foreign policy legacy, it has gone above and beyond the agreement's stipulation that no new nuclear-related sanctions be introduced.  When Yemen's Iran-backed Shiite rebels fired missiles at U.S. Navy vessels, the retaliatory action didn't extend to Tehran. Nor has Iran faced repercussions for joining Syria and Russia's offensive in Aleppo, which has drawn U.S. charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity.  And whenever top Iranian officials have complained about the speed and scope of their post-deal economic recovery, top Obama officials like Secretary of State John Kerry have served as pitchmen to international banks and companies hesitant about investing in Iran.  "It is a whole new reality," said Mark Dubowitz, an Iran sanctions proponent at the hawkish Foundation for Defense of Democracies. What does he expect from Trump? "No more free lunches for the Iranians, no more unilateral concessions, no more excuses."
But his core mission was to implore voters across the country to rally behind Mrs. Clinton on Tuesday, or see the values and ideals that fueled his rise and powered his agenda defeated. So Mr. Obama stumped on Monday with the fervor of a man battling to preserve his legacy and with the joy of one who has watched his approval ratings tick higher as the presidential race’s tenor has sunk ever lower, savoring the almost palpable sense at Mrs. Clinton’s rallies that Americans will miss him when he is gone.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Whatever credibility I’ve earned after eight years as president,” Mr. Obama said, “I am asking you to trust me on this one.”  “I already voted,” he added. “I voted for Hillary Clinton, because I am absolutely confident that when she is president, this country will be in good hands — and I’m asking you to do the same.”  “I love you!” supporters kept shouting at the president as he turned serious to lay out the stakes of an extraordinary race.  “I love you back — I do,” Mr. Obama said in Michigan. “But tomorrow, you will choose whether we continue this journey of progress, or whether it all goes out the window.”  Nostalgia aside, there was no mistaking the seriousness of his message. Mr. Trump could never be trusted with control over the nation’s nuclear arsenal, the president said, if his own staff regarded him as too temperamental to use restraint on social media.  “Over the weekend, his campaign took away his Twitter account,” Mr. Obama said, referring to a report in The New York Times about the closing days of Mr. Trump’s campaign. “Now, if your closest advisers don’t trust you to tweet, then how can we trust him with the nuclear codes?”  “Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be commander in chief,” Mr. Obama said. “He’s unqualified to be America’s chief executive.”  Mr. Obama began his day at the White House, striding out of the residence to board Marine One just after 9:30 a.m. to begin his final campaign sprint. He rarely paused in the hours that followed, jetting from state to state on Air Force One, speeding from airport to rally site and back again in his armored limousine, racing against the clock on a historic presidential contest and his own campaign denouement.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In New Hampshire, his motorcade rushed at sunset down roads flanked by flaming-red and burnt-orange foliage to deliver him to a rally that drew more than 7,600. At the airport in Portsmouth, he confessed to a young boy who asked about the presidential jumbo jet that he was reluctant to relinquish Air Force One.  “I am going to miss this plane,” he told the boy with a smile. “I only have it for a few more months.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  His itinerary on Monday took the president to three states that he won in 2008 and 2012, and that are now crucial bulwarks for Mrs. Clinton. All three are also places where it is more difficult for Democrats to turn out their core supporters because they do not offer early voting.  “It’s not that often you get the chance to move history in a better direction,” Mr. Obama said. “This is one of those moments. Don’t let it slip away.”  In Michigan, he allowed himself a few moments to gloat, reminding voters of all that his administration had done to pull American automobile makers from the brink of bankruptcy.  “I think I’ve earned some credibility here,” Mr. Obama said tartly, repeating the phrase three times as he checked off the metrics of a resurgent automobile industry and recovering manufacturing sector.  He returned to his trademark campaign-trail catchphrases. As he elicited jeers by reciting a litany of criticisms of Mr. Trump — his not paying taxes, his comments about immigrants, women and Muslims — Mr. Obama barked, “Don’t boo. Vote!” He sparked chants of “Yes we can!” and “O-BAM-A.”  In Durham, N.H., he returned to the now-familiar story about how his 2008 campaign found its signature “Fired up! Ready to go!” theme, borrowed from a woman in a small town in South Carolina, whom he met after getting soaked in a driving rain to attend a gathering of only about 20 people.  “Every meeting she goes to, she does this thing” of chanting the refrain, Mr. Obama said. “Which is kind of strange. But the thing is that after a while, I get kind of fired up,” Mr. Obama said. “I’m starting to feel like I’m ready to go.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  When he retired to his cabin on Air Force One, Mr. Obama sat with senior adviser Valerie B. Jarrett, a confidante whose friendship with Mr. Obama dates to his Chicago days, and Susan E. Rice, his national security adviser. Brian Deese, his senior adviser for climate change, came too, along with Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary who has been with him throughout his presidency, and David Simas, his political director.  But it was in the thronging crowd that Mr. Obama seemed to relive his campaign experience most poignantly.  In Ann Arbor, he lingered for several minutes after he finished speaking, clasping hands with supporters and grinning at them broadly, as the strains of Mr. Springsteen’s “Land of Hope and Dreams” pulsed the stadium, a throwback to four years ago.  Then he turned on his heel to go, and a sudden cheer went up as people throughout the emptying stadium raised their arms and gave the president one final wave goodbye.
He said he would quickly cancel a program Mr. Obama put in place by executive action that gave protection from deportation and work permits to about 800,000 undocumented immigrants who came to the United States as children. They will lose jobs and scholarships that allowed many to attend college and start careers, and they will become vulnerable to deportation. Mr. Trump would also permanently cancel a broader protection program for undocumented immigrants that Mr. Obama tried to carry out that was blocked by the courts.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has said he will initiate a campaign to deport, within the first year of his presidency, what he described as up to two million undocumented immigrants with criminal records, although he has not explained how he reached that estimate. Enforcement operations would ramp up, with widespread raids in communities and workplaces.  Mr. Trump is also likely to expand detention centers along the border for illegal crossers, ending the Obama administration’s practice of releasing many families who have come fleeing violence in Central America so they can seek asylum in immigration courts. Mr. Trump has said he will punish so-called sanctuary cities, which have curbed their cooperation with the immigration authorities, by withholding federal funding.  Photo  He has also said he will temporarily halt all Syrian refugees coming to the United States. He has pledged “extreme vetting” for other refugees, including an “ideological certification” by which they would have to show they share American values. He said he would halt immigration from regions of the world that are “compromised by terrorism,” although he has not specified what countries he means.  And he has said he will tighten scrutiny throughout the immigration system, including on foreigners who come to work or to reunite with their families. Although the system already has crippling backlogs, Mr. Trump wants to further reduce legal immigration from its current levels — but he would need the approval of Congress for that.  — JULIA PRESTON  _____  Climate Change  The shift in Washington comes just as the United States has been assuming a leadership role in combating climate change, and it will almost certainly upend the world’s efforts to curb the impact of global warming.  Mr. Trump has repeatedly denied the science of human-caused climate change, incorrectly calling it “fictional” and saying it was a hoax created by the Chinese. He has said that he will do everything in his power to undo Mr. Obama’s ambitious domestic and international climate change policies.  While some legal and procedural roadblocks would impede a complete gutting of Mr. Obama’s existing climate change regulations, Mr. Trump could significantly weaken or slow them. And in sending a message to the rest of the world that the United States does not intend to enact a climate change agenda, the Trump presidency could cause reluctant governments such as those in India and Poland to slow or weaken their efforts to cut planet-warming emissions.  Mr. Trump has vowed to “cancel” the Paris Agreement, the 2015 deal in which nearly every country put forth plans to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide. In fact, it is not possible for a world leader to unilaterally block or undo the accord, nor would it be possible for the United States to legally withdraw from it for at least the first term of a Trump administration. That is because with Mr. Obama and the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, urging other countries to ratify the accord rapidly, it entered into legal force last week. Any country wishing to withdraw must wait four years to do so.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But even though the United States, the world’s second-largest source of greenhouse-gas emissions, remains legally bound to the Paris plan for four years, there will be no legal consequences or economic sanctions if Mr. Trump does not follow through with the Obama administration’s commitment. Under the accord, Mr. Obama promised that the United States would cut emissions up to 28 percent from 2005 levels by 2025, largely through a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations on coal-fired power plants.  Mr. Trump could not immediately block the E.P.A. rules, but over the course of his administration he could ensure that they are weakened or rolled back. Currently, the rules are facing a legal challenge by 28 states and dozens of companies, and the case is expected to go before the Supreme Court as soon as next year. By appointing an industry-friendly Supreme Court justice and failing to argue for the rules, President Trump could weigh the court against them. He could also direct the E.P.A. to rewrite the regulations to be far more lax.  Beyond Mr. Trump’s remarks challenging the science of climate change, he has taken steps to translate those views into policy. The head of environmental policy on his transition team is Myron Ebell, who directs energy and environment policy at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank, and has gained national prominence for his polarizing skepticism of climate science. Also informing Mr. Trump’s transition team is Michael McKenna, an influential Republican energy lobbyist who has urged Republican lawmakers to deny climate science.  — CORAL DAVENPORT  _____  Health Care  Mr. Trump has promised to repeal Mr. Obama’s singular domestic achievement, the Affordable Care Act, and Republicans in Congress have shown the way. Republicans will not have the 60 votes in the Senate needed to pass most major legislation, but through a parliamentary procedure called budget “reconciliation,” they have already done a dry run to gut the existing law without facing a Democratic filibuster.  “Trump can start undoing the law administratively, but most of the action will lie with Congress,” said Chris Jacobs, a conservative health policy analyst who used to work for Republicans on Capitol Hill.  Many provisions of the health law are now deeply embedded in the nation’s health care system. Uprooting them would be a complex political and logistical challenge. Insurers now accept the idea that they cannot deny insurance, or charge higher prices, to people who have been ill.  And Congress may not move instantly to roll back the law without a clear idea of how to replace it — how to insure the 20 million people who have gained coverage under the Affordable Care Act.  Moreover, the Trump administration will not be able to reverse unilaterally the expansion of Medicaid authorized by the health care law. Thirty-one states, including some with Republican governors, have expanded eligibility, with big infusions of federal money. Many of these states would balk at efforts to undo the expansion of Medicaid. The new Medicaid beneficiaries and health care providers, including hospitals, would also fight to preserve the expansion of Medicaid.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  So the political environment could change immensely. Congress may spend months on hearings, debate and legislative maneuvering before making radical changes in the health law, on which public opinion has always been deeply divided. An army of lobbyists for doctors, hospitals, consumers, drug makers and insurance companies will descend on Capitol Hill to shape the legislation.  The requirement for most Americans to carry insurance — the “individual mandate,” enforced through tax penalties — is one of the most unpopular provisions of the law and is a prime target for Republicans eager to dismantle it. Republicans could also pass legislation to lift the requirement for larger employers to offer coverage to their workers, under the employer mandate.  Photo  It is not certain that Congress would repeal the health law in its entirety, but Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress could definitely shift direction, reducing the role of government in health insurance markets, cutting back federal regulation and requirements so insurance would cost less and no-frills options could proliferate.  Mr. Trump would encourage the sale of insurance across state lines, in a bid to increase competition. He and the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, have said they will convert Medicaid, now an open-ended entitlement, into a block grant, giving each state a lump sum of federal money to provide health care to low-income people.  And Mr. Trump would encourage greater use of health savings accounts and let people take tax deductions for insurance premium payments.  — ROBERT PEAR  _____  Economic Policy  Republican control of Washington sets the stage for a sweeping shift in economic policy. Mr. Trump has proposed a fairly standard set of conservative prescriptions, such as lower taxes and less regulation, with one notable departure: a promise to reduce trade with other nations.  The centerpiece of Mr. Trump’s plans is a major overhaul of the federal tax code. Mr. Trump has proposed a sharp reduction in the taxation of businesses and a series of changes that would reduce income taxes for most American households. The wealthiest households would see by far the largest reductions in taxes.  The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimated that Mr. Trump’s plan would cut federal revenues by $6.2 trillion over the next decade — a significantly larger reduction than the last major round of cuts under President George W. Bush in 2001 and 2003.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The plan reduces tax rates for most kinds of income. The top personal income tax rate, for example, would fall to 33 percent from 39.6 percent. The corporate income tax rate would fall to 15 percent from 35 percent. The resulting loss of revenue would be partly offset by eliminating loopholes and limiting deductions.  Such changes would require legislation, but Mr. Trump’s proposal shares considerable common ground with a plan advanced by House Republicans. And through budget reconciliation, major tax cuts — such as Mr. Bush’s — have been passed with simple majority votes in both chambers.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump and his advisers have insisted that these cuts would not increase the federal debt, in part because they say faster growth would increase tax revenues. Previous tax cuts, however, have not produced anything like the projected increase.  Mr. Trump has also promised to make deep but unspecific cuts in federal spending.  At the same time, however, Mr. Trump has said that he would like to increase federal spending on the military, and on infrastructure like roads and bridges.  An analysis by the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated that Mr. Trump’s plans would increase the federal debt by $5.3 trillion over the next decade, and raise the ratio of debt to gross domestic product to 105 percent.  Mr. Trump also has promised to reduce federal regulation. Business groups argue that the Obama administration has impeded economic growth by significantly expanding regulation in areas including environmental and worker protections.  He has specifically promised to reverse some new environmental rules, such as the climate change regulations on power plants. Earlier this year, he also proposed the “dismantling” of the Dodd-Frank Act, which overhauled federal regulation of the financial industry in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. The act created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a likely target for Republican legislators.  Mr. Trump also has promised a major shift in trade policy. He says he will increase American manufacturing by reducing imports from China and other nations.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  His victory almost certainly seals the demise of the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, which the Obama administration negotiated with Japan and other Pacific Rim nations. Mr. Trump also pledged repeatedly to renegotiate or abandon existing trade agreements, notably the North American Free Trade Agreement, or Nafta, which has increased American trade with Canada and Mexico. He also has threatened a variety of sanctions against American companies that move manufacturing jobs overseas, although the legality of such measures is unclear.  Republicans who broadly agree with Mr. Trump on taxes and regulation may have greater reservations about his views on trade. The party has long supported increased trade among nations. But Mr. Trump is the party’s new leader.  — BINYAMIN APPELBAUM
As that empire floundered in the early 1990s, Mr. Trump pressured his financial backers to forgive hundreds of millions of dollars in debt he could not repay. While the cancellation of so much debt gave new life to Mr. Trump’s casinos, it created a potentially crippling problem with the Internal Revenue Service. In the eyes of the I.R.S., a dollar of canceled debt is the same as a dollar of taxable income. This meant Mr. Trump faced the painful prospect of having to report the hundreds of millions of dollars of canceled debt as if it were hundreds of millions of dollars of taxable income.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump’s audacious tax-avoidance maneuver gave him a way to simply avoid reporting any of that canceled debt to the I.R.S. “He’s getting something for absolutely nothing,” John L. Buckley, who served as the chief of staff for Congress’s Joint Committee on Taxation in 1993 and 1994, said in an interview.  The new documents, which include correspondence from Mr. Trump’s tax lawyers and bond offering disclosure statements, might also help explain how Mr. Trump reported a staggering loss of $916 million in his 1995 tax returns, portions of which were first published by The Times last month.  Photo  United States tax laws allowed Mr. Trump to use that $916 million loss to cancel out an equivalent amount of taxable income. But tax experts have been debating how Mr. Trump could have legally declared a deduction of that magnitude at all. Among other things, they have noted that Mr. Trump’s huge casino losses should have been offset by the hundreds of millions of dollars in taxable income he surely must have reported to the I.R.S. in the form of canceled casino debt.  By avoiding reporting his canceled casino debt in the first place, however, Mr. Trump’s $916 million deduction would not have been reduced by hundreds of millions of dollars. He could have preserved the deduction and used it instead to avoid paying income taxes he might otherwise have owed on books, TV shows or branding deals. Under the rules in effect in 1995, the $916 million loss could have been used to wipe out more than $50 million a year in taxable income for 18 years.  Mr. Trump declined to comment for this article.  “Your email suggests either a fundamental misunderstanding or an intentional misreading of the law,” Hope Hicks, Mr. Trump’s spokeswoman, said in a statement. “Your thesis is a criticism, not just of Mr. Trump, but of all taxpayers who take the time and spend the money to try to comply with the dizzyingly complex and ambiguous tax laws without paying more tax than they owe. Mr. Trump does not think that taxpayers should file returns that resolve all doubt in favor of the I.R.S. And any tax experts that you have consulted are engaged in pure speculation. There is no news here.”  Mr. Trump financed his three Atlantic City gambling resorts with $1.3 billion in debt, most of it in the form of high interest junk bonds. By late 1990, after months of escalating operating losses, New Jersey casino regulators were warning that “a complete financial collapse of the Trump Organization was not out of the question.” By 1992, all three casinos had filed for bankruptcy, and bondholders were ultimately forced to forgive hundreds of millions of dollars in debt to salvage at least part of their investment.  Photo  The story of how Mr. Trump sidestepped a potentially ruinous tax bill from that forgiven debt emerged from documents recently discovered by The Times during a search of the casino bankruptcy filings. The documents offer only a partial description of events, and none of Mr. Trump’s tax lawyers agreed to be interviewed for this article.  At the time, Mr. Trump would have been hard-pressed to pay tens of millions of dollars in taxes. According to assessments of his financial stability by New Jersey casino regulators, there were times in the early 1990s when Mr. Trump had no more than a few million dollars in his various bank accounts. He was so strapped for cash that his creditors were apoplectic when they learned that Mr. Trump had bought Marla Maples an engagement ring estimated to be worth $250,000.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It is unclear who first glimpsed a way for Mr. Trump to dodge a huge tax bill. But the basic maneuver he used was essentially a new twist on a contentious strategy corporations had been using for years to avoid taxes created by canceled debt.  The strategy, known among tax practitioners as a “stock-for-debt swap,” relies on mathematical sleight of hand. Say a company can repay only $60 million of a $100 million bank loan. If the bank forgives the remaining $40 million, the company faces a large tax bill because it will have to report that canceled $40 million debt as taxable income.  Clever tax lawyers found a way around this inconvenience. The company would simply swap stock for the $40 million in debt it could not repay. This way, it would look as if the entire $100 million loan had been repaid, and presto: There would be no tax bill due for $40 million in canceled debt.  Best of all, it did not matter if the actual market value of the stock was considerably less than the $40 million in canceled debt. (Stock in an effectively insolvent company could easily be next to worthless.) Even in the opaque, rarefied world of gaming impenetrable tax regulations, this particular maneuver was about as close as a company could get to waving a magic wand and making taxes disappear.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Alarmed by the obvious potential for abuse, Congress and the I.R.S. made repeated efforts during the 1980s to curb this brand of tax wizardry before banning its use by corporations altogether in 1993. But while policy makers were busy trying to stop corporations from using this particular ploy, the endlessly creative club of elite tax advisers was inventing a new way to circumvent the ban, this time through the use of partnerships.  This was the twist that was especially beneficial to Mr. Trump. Wealthy families like the Trumps often own real estate and other assets through partnerships rather than corporations. Mr. Trump, for example, owned all three of his Atlantic City casinos through partnerships, an arrangement that allowed casino profits to flow directly to his personal tax returns when times were good.  But what if times were bad? What if Mr. Trump’s casino partnerships could not repay hundreds of millions of dollars they owed to bondholders? And what if the bondholders were persuaded to forgive this debt? Wouldn’t that force the partnerships — i.e., Mr. Trump — to report hundreds of millions of dollars of taxable income in the form of canceled debt?  Enter the tax advisers with their audacious plan: Why not eliminate all that taxable income from canceled debt by swapping “partnership equity” for debt in exactly the same way corporations had been swapping company stock for debt?  True enough, the I.R.S. and Congress had clearly signaled their disapproval of the basic concept. Fred T. Goldberg, who was the I.R.S. commissioner under George Bush, recalled in an interview that the I.R.S. frowned on partnership equity-for-debt swaps for the same reason it objected to corporate stock-for-debt swaps. “The fiction is that the partnership interest has the same value as the debt,” he said. Lee A. Sheppard, a contributing editor to Tax Notes, wrote in 1991 that trying to find a legal justification for this tactic was akin to proving “the existence of the Loch Ness monster.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump boasts of his mastery of tax loopholes and claims no other candidate for the White House has ever known more about the tax code. This background, he argues with evident disgust, gives him special insight into the way wealthy elites buy off politicians and hire high-priced lawyers and accountants to rig the tax system — just as, he claims, they rig elections.  That insight was on display in 1991 and 1992 when he was laying the groundwork to make a multimillion-dollar tax bill disappear.  Before proceeding with his plan, Mr. Trump did what most prudent taxpayers do: He sought a formal tax opinion letter. Such letters, typically written by highly paid lawyers who spend entire careers mastering the roughly 10,000 pages of ever-changing statutes that make up the United States tax code, can provide important protection to taxpayers. As long as a tax adviser blesses a particular tax strategy in a formal opinion letter, the taxpayer most likely will not face penalties even if the I.R.S. ultimately rules the strategy was improper.  The language used in tax opinion letters has a specialized meaning understood by all tax professionals. So, for example, when a tax lawyer writes that a shelter is “more likely than not” going to be approved by the I.R.S., this means there is at least a 51 percent chance the shelter will withstand scrutiny. (This is known as an “M.L.T.N.” letter in the vernacular of tax lawyers.) A “should” letter means there is about a 75 percent chance the I.R.S. will not object. The gold standard, a “will” letter, means the I.R.S. is all but certain to bless the tax avoidance strategy.  But the opinion letters Mr. Trump received from his tax lawyers at Willkie Farr & Gallagher were far from the gold standard. The letters bluntly warned that there was no statute, regulation or judicial opinion that explicitly permitted Mr. Trump’s tax gambit. “Due to the lack of definitive judicial or administrative authority,” his lawyers wrote, “substantial uncertainties exist with respect to many of the tax consequences of the plan.”  One letter, 25 pages long, analyzed seven distinct components of Mr. Trump’s proposed tax maneuver. It found only “substantial authority” for six of the components. In the stilted language of tax opinion letters, the phrase “substantial authority” is a red flag that the lawyers believe the I.R.S. can be expected to rule against the taxpayer roughly two-thirds of the time. In other words, Mr. Trump’s tax lawyers were telling him there were at least six different reasons the I.R.S. would probably cry foul if he were audited. In anticipation of that possibility, the lawyers even laid out a fallback plan that would have allowed Mr. Trump to spread the pain of a large tax hit over many years if the I.R.S. ultimately balked.  It is unclear whether the I.R.S. ever challenged Mr. Trump’s use of this specific tax maneuver. According to a financial disclosure statement prepared by Mr. Trump’s accountants, he was under audit by the tax authorities as of 1993, only a year after he avoided reporting hundreds of millions of dollars in taxable income because of this legally suspect tactic. But the results of that audit are unknown, and the agency declined to comment on Monday.  Regardless of whether the I.R.S. objected, Mr. Trump’s tax avoidance in this case violated a central principle of American tax law, said Mr. Buckley, the former chief of staff for Congress’s Joint Committee on Taxation, who later served as chief tax counsel for Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “He deducted somebody else’s losses,” Mr. Buckley said. By that, Mr. Buckley meant that only the bondholders who forgave Mr. Trump’s unpaid casino debts should have been allowed to use those losses to offset future income and reduce their taxes. That Mr. Trump used the same losses to reduce his taxes ultimately increases the tax burden on everyone else, Mr. Buckley explained. “He is double dipping big time.”  In any event, Mr. Trump can no longer benefit from the same maneuver. Just as Congress acted in 1993 to ban stock-for-debt swaps by corporations, it acted in 2004 to ban equity-for-debt swaps by partnerships.  Among the members of Congress who voted to finally close the loophole: Senator Hillary Clinton of New York.
A Massachusetts Institute of Technology analysis determined that blacks and Hispanics waited nearly twice as long in line to vote on average than whites. Florida had the nation’s longest lines, at 45 minutes, followed by the District of Columbia, Maryland, South Carolina and Virginia, according to Charles Stewart III, the political science professor who conducted the analysis.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A separate analysis, by an Ohio State University professor and The Orlando Sentinel, concluded that more than 200,000 voters in Florida “gave up in frustration” without voting.  “When I got there, the line was around the building,” said Jonathan Piccolo, 33, who said he had waited nearly eight hours to cast a ballot in Miami-Dade County the Monday before Election Day.  “It’s one of the most sacred rights you have,” Mr. Piccolo added. “They should make it as painless as possible.”  As the Supreme Court prepares to hear a major challenge to the Voting Rights Act this month — with a decision potentially giving states more freedom to tighten voting requirements — election issues seem likely to become even more of a flash point.  Republicans in several states across the country have passed or promoted measures they say are meant to reduce voter fraud, like stricter identification requirements. Some have also cited costs; Florida, for instance, had eight days of early voting in November, down from 14, after the Republican-led Legislature changed the law.  By highlighting long waits and cumbersome voter registration as issues, Democrats hope they have found a counterattack. Democrats have already tried to block the Republican efforts, noting that nonpartisan analyses have generally found voter fraud to be extremely rare.  Waiting times are “costing America a lot of votes,” said Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, a New York Democrat who is sponsoring the Senate voting bill and expects to have the full support of the White House.  She added, “We’ve talked to some of the White House staff about this from the beginning, and I think it’s something they care deeply about, and I think it’s something they will help us pass.”  Photo  Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, the assistant Democratic leader in the House, said he had received similar assurances from the White House. “I think he’s going devote a pretty significant amount of his political resources to bear on this question,” he said of President Obama.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama, a former community organizer who worked to register poor voters in Chicago, declared waiting times a top concern in speeches both on election night and at his second inauguration. “Our journey is not complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to exercise the right to vote,” he said on Inauguration Day.  But getting anything passed without Republican support will be impossible, Democrats acknowledge. And so far, conservatives have complained that Democrats are politicizing an issue that should be handled by the states, not the federal government.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “It’s ridiculous to stand in line a couple of hours to vote,” said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the senior Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee. “But I think it’s also ridiculous to make a political issue out of it when it’s very easily handled.”  Because Democrats have been primarily focused on issues like gun control and immigration this year and have not yet devoted much time to voting rights, it is difficult to know their chances for success.  Two factors that help determine waiting times, experts say, are the length of the ballot and the number of voters per polling place. Mr. Stewart said California stood out as an example of a place that reduces waiting times by having relatively low numbers of voters per precinct.  “Despite the fact that it’s a very large state, a very complicated state, and has the longest ballots in the Western world — all these things that you’d think would complicate voting — they don’t wait that long,” Mr. Stewart said.  California’s had one of the 10 shortest average waits of any state, at six minutes, according to Mr. Stewart.  In some other places, including counties and cities run by Democrats, local officials have not spent the money to open as many polling places. The high turnout of young and minority voters in 2008 and 2012 may also have contributed to long lines.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ashley Marie Lapadula, a student at Florida International University in Miami who said she voted for Mitt Romney in November, said she went to two different polling sites, leaving one where the wait appeared to be about three hours only to wait three hours at another.  She said she saw numerous voters, mostly Spanish speakers, leave. “Most of them said: ‘I have to get back to work. I don’t have time for this. This is incredible, the waiting is just too long,’ ” Ms. Lapadula said.  Theodore T. Allen, a systems engineer at Ohio State who conducted the analysis of Florida voting last year, said that lengthy ballots also played an important role in how long voting takes. “It’s not because people are dumb or old,” he said. “It’s just that they have twice as much to read and process.”  The average wait nationwide was 14 minutes last year, according to Mr. Stewart’s data. Blacks and Hispanics waited an average of 20.2 minutes, compared with 12.7 minutes for whites. In the most populous areas — those with more than 500,000 voters in a county — the average wait was 18 minutes, more than double what it was in counties with fewer than 50,000 voters.  According to Mr. Allen’s estimates, waiting times cost Mr. Obama a net of about 15,000 votes in Florida. He carried the state by about 74,000 votes.
The records demonstrate that large portions of those numbers represent cash coming into his businesses before covering costs like mortgage payments, payroll and maintenance. After expenses, some of his businesses make a small fraction of what he reported on his disclosure forms, or actually lose money. In fact, it is virtually impossible to determine from the forms just how much he is earning in any year.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump appears to have used a provision in federal ethics laws that allows business owners to list gross revenue, as opposed to net income after expenses, on their disclosure forms. But he does not seem to have completely acknowledged that choice. Rather, he has suggested that the figures on the form represent money in his pocket.  In news releases, the Trump campaign said that “Mr. Trump’s income” listed in a disclosure form filed last year was $362 million, and was more than $557 million in a form filed this year. During the debate with Mrs. Clinton in September, he mentioned an even larger figure.  “It shows income … in fact, the income — I just looked today — the income is filed at $694 million for this past year, $694 million,” Mr. Trump said. “If you would have told me I was going to make that 15 or 20 years ago, I would have been very surprised.”  A spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, Hope Hicks, declined to answer questions about how Mr. Trump had reported his income, saying only that his disclosure form “speaks for itself.”  Another seeming cash cow, at least as far as the forms portray it, is 40 Wall Street, an office building Mr. Trump has spoken of as perhaps the greatest bargain he ever struck. “I make approximately $20 million a year in rentals from 40 Wall Street and the building is now worth $500 million,” Mr. Trump wrote in “Trump Never Give Up,” published in 2008. “So, aside from owning the most beautiful building in Lower Manhattan, I have the added attraction of making a profit.”  Photo  On his financial disclosure forms, Mr. Trump listed the income he derived from rents in the building in the highest category on the form — more than $5 million. (The form requires listing monetary ranges for most types of income, and precise dollar figures where the gross revenue of a business is provided.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the income and expense statement that he filed with the New York City Tax Commission to appeal his property taxes shows that after mortgage payments and other costs, the building produced a cash flow of about $104,000 in 2014. Over the previous three years, it had generated a negative cash flow of $5.5 million, as the fallout of the 2008 financial crisis took a toll on downtown office buildings.  Last year, the building rebounded and turned a significant profit: Occupancy rose to 95 percent, according to securities filings. The building’s cash flow after expenses was just under $3 million, still well below the more than $5 million that Mr. Trump reported on his disclosure forms. The building also paid the Trump Organization $966,000 last year in management fees.  Joel Rosenfeld, a real estate accountant and New York University professor who reviewed some of the filings at The Times’s request, said Mr. Trump’s narrow margins at 40 Wall Street before last year raised questions about the building’s long-term prospects. “He may have turned the corner,” Mr. Rosenfeld said.  The recent negative cash flow at two of Mr. Trump’s premier properties raises possible motivations he may have for not releasing his tax returns: They could show that his success is not as he has claimed, or that he pays little or nothing in federal taxes. That could be a continuation of a long trend. An article last month in The Times revealed that Mr. Trump’s 1995 tax records showed a $916 million loss that could have allowed Mr. Trump to legally avoid paying federal income taxes for up to 18 years.  While the property tax appeals are a useful reality check on individual properties, they provide an imperfect window to Mr. Trump’s overall income and wealth.  The income and expense statements in such appeals are not available on every Trump property for every year. Also, the performance of a few properties cannot reflect the entirety of Mr. Trump’s endeavors, which have included the successful “Apprentice” reality television series as well as naming rights and management fees he earns from buildings in New York and elsewhere. And the nine-figure numbers Mr. Trump presents as his income do not include streams like royalties, investments and capital gains.  But the appeals show a level of detail absent in other documents that have become public. While appeals on residential properties are based on appraisals that have a level of subjectivity, commercial appeals typically start with the amount of income a business makes after expenses. The appeals filed in New York include figures that were certified by a public accountant and sworn to by Mr. Trump, under penalty of prosecution if he intentionally misstated them. They were supported by rent rolls and other documentation.  At the Trump International Hotel and Tower, on Columbus Circle in Manhattan, Mr. Trump owns a parking garage and the restaurant space occupied by Jean Georges. On his disclosure forms, Mr. Trump listed his income from the garage and the restaurant space as between $1 million and $5 million. On the income and expense statements he filed in a property tax appeal for 2015, he showed gross income of $1.6 million on the spaces. But after he paid operating expenses and mortgage payments, only $43,000 was left for the year. His company did collect a $50,000 management fee on the two spaces.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At some of Mr. Trump’s properties, the cash generated is closer to, or matches, what showed up on his financial disclosure forms. For example, at the first apartment building he developed in Manhattan, Trump Tower, the 18 floors of office and retail spaces that a Trump entity owns produced positive cash flow of $13 million in 2015, even after mortgage payments. That would match the claim on his financial disclosure form of making more than $5 million on the spaces.  But time and again, what the form presented as income did not match what was reported in other documents. Mr. Trump also runs several publicly owned attractions — the carousel and ice rinks in Central Park and a golf course in the Bronx — under agreements with New York City.  Mr. Trump’s disclosure forms reported income from the Wollman and Lasker ice rinks of just under $13 million last year, and $8.6 million the year before. But accounting figures provided by his company to the city show that those figures represent gross receipts. And city contract documents show that out of that amount, he had to turn over to the city 28 percent of gross receipts and 56 percent of food sales, and cover expenses like utility payments and salaries. Recent figures were not available, but a 2011 city audit showed that for the previous three years, an average of $25,340 a year for both rinks was left after expenses.  On the disclosure form he filed this year, which apparently covered 2015 and part of 2016, more than half of Mr. Trump’s claimed income was generated by his golf resorts. As an industry, privately owned golf resorts lost 2 cents for every dollar in revenue for the year that ended in September, and that was the industry’s best year since the 2008 recession, according to Sageworks, a financial information company.  In recent years, Mr. Trump has made major investments in golf resorts. He bought the Doral golf resort near Miami in 2012 for $150 million, of which $104 million represented the real estate for property tax purposes.  After the appeal of his property taxes was heard in June, the special magistrate, Leonardo Delgado, lowered the resort’s property taxes by $46,534.  At one point during the hearing, Mr. Delgado stared at the income and expense report showing that Doral had lost $2.4 million in 2014, a number that did not even include millions of dollars in mortgage payments. Mr. Delgado began to chuckle and turned to the county property assessor, Murry Harris.  “So he spent $104 million to lose two and a half million dollars a year,” Mr. Delgado said. “I know how to lose that money without having to spend $104 million. How ’bout you, Murry?”
Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, has held discussions with Mr. Trump about his attacks on Judge Gonzalo P. Curiel of Federal District Court, who is overseeing a suit against the now-shuttered Trump University, according to a Republican briefed on the talks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Priebus has had similar conversations over many months with Mr. Trump, to little avail. And other senior Republicans said there was confusion about whether it was worth approaching any of Mr. Trump’s aides about doing an intervention with him.  Republican candidates in tough races this fall were left to fend for themselves. Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire called on Mr. Trump to retract his comments about Judge Curiel, calling them “offensive and wrong.”  Other candidates lay low. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a former rival of Mr. Trump’s, and Senator Susan Collins of Maine both criticized Mr. Trump, yet neither they nor Ms. Ayotte indicated that they would reject his candidacy.  “I continue to hope that Mr. Trump will rethink his position and take back those words and show respect for the separation of powers doctrine that is enshrined in our Constitution,” Ms. Collins said in an interview. “I continue to believe in redemption.”  No prominent elected Republican came to Mr. Trump’s defense unreservedly. And others found themselves wondering aloud what it would take — what Mr. Trump would have to say or do — for Republicans who have endorsed him to start jumping ship.  Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, another former primary rival of Mr. Trump’s, urged Republicans who have backed Mr. Trump to rescind their endorsements, citing the remarks about Judge Curiel and Mr. Trump’s expression of doubt on Sunday that a Muslim judge could remain neutral in the same lawsuit, given Mr. Trump’s proposed ban on Muslim noncitizens entering the country.  “This is the most un-American thing from a politician since Joe McCarthy,” Mr. Graham said. “If anybody was looking for an off-ramp, this is probably it,” he added. “There’ll come a time when the love of country will trump hatred of Hillary.”  Republican hopes that Mr. Trump would tone down his language and heed advice were also undercut after he laced into his own campaign team during a strategy discussion with political surrogates.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On the conference call, reported first by the Bloomberg News website and later confirmed by two participants, Mr. Trump argued that talking points sent by his campaign to his allies, directing them not to discuss the Trump University case, were ill advised.  “Take that order and throw it the hell out,” Mr. Trump said.  He then went further in excoriating his campaign staff: “Are there any other stupid letters that were sent to you folks?” Mr. Trump said, according to the Bloomberg News report. “That’s one of the reasons I want to have this call, because you guys are getting sometimes stupid information from people that aren’t so smart.”  Clinton Clinches Delegates for Nomination Hillary Clinton has reached the number of delegates needed to clinch the Democratic nomination for president, The Associated Press reported.  No other modern presidential campaign has unfolded like this, and gleeful Democrats have concluded that one of their best strategies for the general election is to hold Republicans accountable for each new Trump bombshell.  In Indiana, state Democratic Party officials held a news conference on Monday to assail Mr. Trump’s remarks about Judge Curiel, who was born in the state and graduated from Indiana University’s law school. But the party’s chairman, John Zody, spent even more time criticizing Gov. Mike Pence, a Republican seeking re-election this year, and Republican House and Senate candidates in Indiana for being “completely silent on the fact that Donald Trump is questioning the integrity of a Hoosier.” Only a few Republican officials in the state have criticized Mr. Trump’s comments as inappropriate.  Outside Trump Tower in Manhattan, meanwhile, Melissa Mark-Viverito, the speaker of the New York City Council, and Councilman Carlos Menchaca told reporters that Mr. Trump’s comments about the judge were racist and xenophobic and reflected disrespect for the judiciary system.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “He’s quite literally saying Judge Curiel can’t do his job because of his ethnicity. That is the definition of racism,” said Ms. Mark-Viverito, who is Puerto Rican. “It’s gross, it’s vile, and it is not normal behavior for anyone, let alone someone running to be the president of the United States.”  The Democratic offensive was more systematic and effective than earlier, scattershot attempts to link Republicans to Mr. Trump’s incendiary language and to his refusal to release his tax returns, among other actions.  Hillary Clinton’s campaign was quick to act, putting out a video Monday morning that drew attention to Mr. Trump’s remarks and to some critical responses to him by other Republicans.  Representative Tammy Duckworth, Democrat of Illinois, accused Senator Mark Kirk, the Republican she is challenging, of being “complicit” in Mr. Trump’s campaign of “hate and division” and of dodging Mr. Trump’s comments on Judge Curiel; Mr. Kirk did not reply to requests for comment. Democrats in Nevada also held a news conference to draw attention to Mr. Trump’s remarks, while others publicized them to reporters in Ohio and Florida.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Capitol Hill, House Democrats held a private conference call to discuss how to apply pressure on the Republican leadership.  “Trump’s incendiary comments about Judge Curiel were the final straw,” said Representative Steve Israel, Democrat of New York. He added, referring to Speaker Paul D. Ryan, “We’re not going to let Speaker Ryan and House Republicans spend every day criticizing Trump with one hand and endorsing him with the other.”  Texas Democrats are expected to try to hammer Mr. Trump when he visits their state in a week. And the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee is preparing material to guide its candidates in attacking their opponents over Mr. Trump’s positions.  It remains very unlikely that ambitious Republicans and those on the ballot this year will publicly break with Mr. Trump until it becomes politically advantageous for them. At the moment, Mr. Trump enjoys wide support from the sort of rank-and-file Republican voters whom elected officials are loath to antagonize.  Mr. Rubio, who has said he would speak at the Republican convention and personally apologized to Mr. Trump for making jokes about the size of his anatomy during the primary, confirmed in a Florida television interview that he would still support Mr. Trump.  Still, Mr. Trump expressed displeasure at criticism from his allies. In a Monday morning interview on Fox News, he faulted former Speaker Newt Gingrich for saying the Curiel attacks were “inexcusable.”  “I was surprised at Newt — I thought it was inappropriate what he said,” Mr. Trump said.  The unified Democratic attack on Mr. Trump came on the final day of campaigning before primaries in California, New Jersey and several other states.  In California, Mrs. Clinton blasted Mr. Trump as running a “campaign of insults,” and said: “I’m waiting for him to say — because of all the bigoted things he has said about women — that a woman judge couldn’t preside.” Senator Bernie Sanders, also in California, insisted that he was still the Democrats’ best hope of defeating Mr. Trump.  For other Democrats, though, Mr. Trump’s words were buoying hopes of a November resurgence.  In a speech on the Senate floor as Congress returned from a break, the Senate minority leader, Harry Reid of Nevada, sought to yoke Mr. Trump to his counterpart, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky — and to every Republican running this fall. Mr. Reid pointed out that Mr. McConnell, interviewed on NBC on Sunday, had “repeatedly refused to say Donald Trump’s attacks on Judge Curiel’s ethnicity are racist.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This is precisely the type of failure that gave rise to Donald Trump in the first place,” Mr. Reid said. “That’s because the hate emanating from Trump’s mouth reflects the Republican Party’s agenda here in the United States Senate for the past seven and a half years.”
Video  Donald J. Trump, the garrulous real estate developer whose name has adorned apartment buildings, hotels, Trump-brand neckties and Trump-brand steaks, announced on Tuesday his entry into the 2016 presidential race, brandishing his wealth and fame as chief qualifications in an improbable quest for the Republican nomination.  Mr. Trump declared his candidacy in the atrium of the Trump Tower, the luxury skyscraper on Fifth Avenue in New York City, proclaiming that only someone “really rich” — like himself — could restore American economic primacy.  “We need somebody that can take the brand of the United States and make it great again,” he said, repeatedly assailing China and Mexico as economic competitors, and pledging to be “the greatest jobs president that God ever created.”  Mr. Trump, 69, has long toyed with running for president as a Republican, boasting of his credentials as an entrepreneur and mocking the accomplishments of prominent elected officials. He has used the platform of a reality television show, NBC’s “The Apprentice,” to burnish his pop-culture image as a formidable man of affairs.  It seems a remote prospect that Republicans, stung in 2012 by the caricature of their nominee, Mitt Romney, as a pampered and politically tone-deaf financier, would rebound by nominating a real estate magnate who has published books with titles such as, “Think Like a Billionaire” and “Midas Touch: Why Some Entrepreneurs Get Rich — And Why Most Don’t.”  But Mr. Trump, who has never held elective office, may not be so easily confined to the margins of the 2016 campaign. Thanks to his enormous media profile, he stands a good chance of qualifying for nationally televised debates, where his appetite for combat and skill at playing to the gallery could make him a powerfully disruptive presence.  In the past, Mr. Trump’s presidential posturing has seldom been taken seriously, and for good reason: Before the 2000 and 2012 elections, he hyped up the possibility of seeking the White House before abandoning the idea.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s remarks in Midtown Manhattan were unlikely to allay suspicions that he is entering the race mainly to appear in debates and win attention from the media. He bragged extensively about the golf resorts he owns (“I have the best courses in the world”) and a hotel he is developing in Washington.  Over the course of a more than 40-minute speech, Mr. Trump warned that the stock market may collapse again and ridiculed Secretary of State John F. Kerry for having broken his leg in a bicycle accident.  But Mr. Trump and his allies insist that he is serious about the race. He said he would file all the financial disclosure forms required by the Federal Election Commission, without requesting any extensions from the government. At one point, Mr. Trump held up a one-page document — compiled, he said, by a prominent accounting firm — purporting to show his net worth at around $8.7 billion, with nearly all of his estimated assets in the form of property and licensing deals.  A spokeswoman said he would fill out the election commission paperwork in full, though it is unclear whether Mr. Trump will make a more complete disclosure of tax returns, as is customary for credible presidential candidates.  Photo  Associates say Mr. Trump is willing, even eager, to spend his fortune in the race, and has hired staff in the early nominating states. “He has said a couple of times that he could easily put $100 million into the race and that he feels that would not impact him financially,” said Christopher Ruddy, a friend of Mr. Trump’s.  Mr. Ruddy, who is chief executive of Newsmax, the conservative magazine and website, said Mr. Trump would bring an unaccustomed level of glamour to the Republican field.  “He’s got that celebrity status,” Mr. Ruddy said. “Republicans sort of crave that, because we don’t have it, generally.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Geraldo Rivera, the veteran broadcaster who was a finalist on “Celebrity Apprentice,” said Mr. Trump would quickly leave a mark on the race thanks to his ability as a showman.  “Right now, Jeb Bush is announcing,” Mr. Rivera said Monday afternoon. “Who would you rather watch, him or Trump?”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But as well-known as he is, Mr. Trump is also widely disliked: A recent Quinnipiac University poll found that about seven in 10 voters nationally hold an unfavorable view of him, including 52 percent of Republicans.  Mr. Trump has shown he is eager to scuffle with other Republicans, including Mr. Bush. He has spoken contemptuously, in public and private, about the former Florida governor, and swiped at him repeatedly during the kickoff event.  “I don’t see how he can possibly get the nomination,” he said of Mr. Bush. “He’s weak on immigration. He’s in favor of Common Core. How the hell can you vote for this guy?”  Mr. Trump’s policy views can be just as provocative as his demeanor. In the past, he has called climate change “a hoax” and said he has a “foolproof” plan to defeat the Islamic State, which he will not reveal so as not to tip off the group. On Tuesday, he vowed to build a “great wall” on the Mexican border to keep out rapists and other criminals, who he said were sneaking into the United States in droves.  Until now, Mr. Trump may be best known politically for his outspoken skepticism that President Obama was born in the United States. After his insistent demands during the 2012 race that Mr. Obama release his birth certificate, the president ultimately did just that, confirming he was born in Hawaii.  Mr. Trump has donated money to both parties, including to Democrats such as Hillary Rodham Clinton. When he last entertained a presidential bid four years ago, the conservative Club for Growth labeled him a liberal for his views on trade and his past support for universal health care, and accused him of having exploited government powers, including the use of eminent domain, to expand his real estate holdings.  If Mr. Trump’s ideology has proved flexible, the cornerstone of his worldview has not: He has consistently been a passionate believer in Donald Trump, and his own capacity to bully and badger his way into the best possible deal. That skill set, Mr. Trump has argued, would be an asset to America.  At present, Mr. Trump said, rivals on the world stage do not take the United States seriously.  “They say: that is a group of people, and that is a nation, that truly has no clue,” he said.
Mr. Trump was swept to power in large part by white working-class voters who responded to his vow to restore the voices of forgotten people, ones drowned out by big business and Wall Street. But in his transition to power, some of the most prominent voices will be those of advisers who come from the same industries for which they are being asked to help set the regulatory groundwork.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The president-elect’s spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, declined a request for comment, as did nearly a dozen corporate executives, consultants and lobbyists serving on his transition team, which was outlined in a list distributed widely in Washington on Thursday.  A number of the people on that list are well-established experts with no clear interest in helping private-sector clients. But to critics of Mr. Trump — both Democrats and Republicans — the inclusion of advisers with industry ties is a first sign that he may not follow through on all of his promises.  “This whole idea that he was an outsider and going to destroy the political establishment and drain the swamp were the lines of a con man, and guess what — he is being exposed as just that,” said Peter Wehner, who served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush before becoming a speechwriter for George W. Bush. “He is failing the first test, and he should be held accountable for it.”  Transition teams help new presidents pick the new cabinet, as well as up to 4,000 political appointees who will take over top posts in agencies across the government. President Obama, after he was first elected, instituted rules that prohibited individuals who had served as registered lobbyists in the prior year from serving as transition advisers in the areas in which they represented private clients. They were also prohibited, after the administration took power, from lobbying in the parts of the government they helped set up.  “They wanted to make sure that people were not putting their thumb on the scale, or even the perception of that,” said Martha Joynt Kumar, the director of a nonprofit group called the White House Transition Project, which has studied two decades of presidential transitions.  Among the advisers assisting Mr. Trump who have no clear private-sector ties are Brian Johnson, a top lawyer for the House Financial Services Committee, who is helping to pick top staff members for the federal government’s many financial services agencies.  Edwin Meese III, who served as attorney general under Mr. Reagan and is now associated with the Heritage Foundation, the conservative think tank, is helping oversee management and budget issues, along with Kay Coles James, a Bush administration official who now runs an institute that trains future African-American leaders.  Former Representative Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan, who served as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and was once a special agent in the F.B.I., is overseeing issues related to national security, including the intelligence agencies and the Department of Homeland Security.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But in other areas, most notably the energy sector, the transition team advisers are far from independent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Catanzaro’s client list is a who’s who of major corporate players — such as the Hess Corporation and Devon Energy — that have tried to challenge the Obama administration’s environmental and energy policies on issues such as how much methane gas can be released at oil and gas drilling sites, lobbying disclosure reports show.  He also worked with oil industry players to help push through major legislation goals, such as allowing the export of crude oil. He will now help pick Mr. Trump’s energy team.  Michael McKenna, another lobbyist helping to pick key administration officials who will oversee energy policy, has a client list that this year has included the Southern Company, one of the most vocal critics of efforts to prevent climate change by putting limits on emissions from coal-burning power plants.  Advisers with ties to other industries include Martin Whitmer, who is overseeing “transportation and infrastructure” for the Trump transition. He is the chairman of a Washington law firm whose lobbying clients include the Association of American Railroads and the National Asphalt Pavement Association.  David Malpass, the former chief economist at Bear Stearns, the Wall Street investment bank that collapsed during the 2008 financial crisis, is overseeing the “economic issues” portfolio of the transition, as well as operations at the Treasury Department. Mr. Malpass now runs a firm called Encima Global, which sells economic research to institutional investors and corporate clients.  Mr. Eisenach, as a telecom industry consultant, has worked to help major cellular companies fight back against regulations proposed by the F.C.C. that would mandate so-called net neutrality — requiring providers to give equal access to their networks to outside companies. He is now helping to oversee the rebuilding of the staff at the F.C.C.  Dan DiMicco, a former chief executive of the steelmaking company Nucor, who now serves on the board of directors of Duke Energy, is heading the transition team for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. Mr. DiMicco has long argued that China is unfairly subsidizing its manufacturing sector at the expense of American jobs.  In his campaign, Mr. Trump promised to take steps to close the so-called revolving door, through which government officials leave their posts and then personally profit by helping private companies reap rewards from policies or programs they had recently managed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In October, declaring that “it’s time to drain the swamp in Washington,” he promised to institute a five-year ban in which all executive branch officials would be prevented from lobbying the government after they left. He has also promised to expand the definition of a lobbyist, so it includes corporate consultants who do not register as lobbyists but still often act like one.  Bruce F. Freed, the president of a nonprofit group called the Center for Political Accountability, which is pressing major corporations to be more transparent about their political spending, said Mr. Trump’s transition team had sent an unfortunate signal to his followers.  “This is one of the reasons you had such anger among voters — people rigging the system, gaming the system,” Mr. Freed said. “This represents more of the same.”
Photo  Donald J. Trump, the president-elect, was subdued in his triumph on Wednesday, cloistering himself in New York City with a handful of aides and family members as he turned toward the enormous task of assembling a government.  For all his boisterousness during the campaign, Mr. Trump was more muted than exuberant in its aftermath, according to people who spoke with him throughout the day. His victory over Hillary Clinton caught even him by surprise: Like Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump tracked the race through private polling that indicated he was headed for defeat, and he went all but silent in his apartment on Tuesday night as the returns from Florida turned in his favor.  A startled Mr. Trump fielded conciliatory phone calls from political dignitaries, including Republicans who resisted his candidacy, like Presidents George Bush and George W. Bush, and from Democrats with whom he may clash in office, like Nancy Pelosi, the minority leader in the House of Representatives.  But Mr. Trump said nothing in public, and as the political world reeled from his electoral success, the president-elect and his advisers did little to address the array of questions hanging over Trump Tower.  Photo  Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a close ally of Mr. Trump’s who had been assigned to lead the transition process, emerged from the skyscraper around 4:30 in the afternoon but rebuffed requests for comment. (“No interviews today,” he said.)  Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, emerging from meetings in the early evening, said Mr. Trump and his team would soon “move forward to a more specific agenda,” but did not elaborate. “I’ll just say the team has done what transitions traditionally do at this point,” he added.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Up to now, aides to Mr. Trump said, the team of advisers working on a potential transition has labored more or less in segregation from the campaign apparatus.  Over the summer, Mr. Trump collected a few practiced Washington hands to help him design an administration, including veterans of the first Bush administration and Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign.  Among them were Jamie Burke and William Hagerty, both former Romney advisers, and Ado Machida, a former aide to Vice President Dick Cheney.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But Mr. Trump remained preoccupied almost exclusively with the campaign and refused to discuss the transition with his aides out of superstition, according to two people briefed on the process.  He took few steps to recruit a conventional team of Washington veterans who might accompany him into government, after the fashion of past candidates like George W. Bush, who assembled something of a national security shadow cabinet ahead of the 2000 general election.  Mr. Trump held a few meetings on Wednesday to spur that process, huddling with a group that included his children; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; and Stephen K. Bannon, the chairman of Breitbart News Network, who helped steer Mr. Trump’s campaign. Mr. Trump met separately with a group of aides to Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, his running mate, along with Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner.  Michael O. Leavitt, a former governor of Utah who managed Mr. Romney’s transition team, said Mr. Trump’s transition would probably focus at first on a few key appointments, like naming a White House chief of staff.  Mr. Leavitt said he met several times with Mr. Trump’s team to discuss the mechanics of transition planning, and described it as a “full-blown” operation.  Photo  “There are whole series of things that have to happen: getting a team on the field, beginning to lay out the how-to of the commitments the president-elect has made,” Mr. Leavitt said. “Right now, they’re going to be focused mostly on personnel and logistics.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Yet the transition aides in Washington were given a limited mandate for mapping out an administration, people briefed on their efforts said. They were asked to line up potential candidates for cabinet-level offices, but not to fill out full staff rosters for federal departments and agencies, one person said.  There is no extensive process underway for vetting potential Trump appointees. The names in circulation on Wednesday for the high offices of state were largely drawn from the tight circle of political true believers who surrounded Mr. Trump during the campaign: Rudolph W. Giuliani, former mayor of New York; Steven Mnuchin, the chief fund-raiser for Mr. Trump’s campaign; and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who struck up a friendship with Mr. Trump.  Within that group, Mr. Giuliani may be the most likely to receive a coveted appointment, as a reward for his slash-and-burn campaigning in the general election.  Mr. Christie, too, is seen as a candidate for the cabinet, but his entanglement in a continuing political retribution scandal in New Jersey could make it difficult for him to be confirmed by the Senate.
Mr. Trump made the comments to The Wall Street Journal in his first interview since winning the election. The newspaper said Mr. Obama had urged the president-elect to reconsider repealing his signature health care law, which Mr. Trump said had become “unworkable.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But in the interview, Mr. Trump said he told the president that he would consider keeping two provisions of the law: the prohibition against insurers denying coverage because of a patient’s pre-existing condition; and the one that allows parents to keep their children on their insurance plans until they turn 26.  The problem: Without a mandate for everyone to buy health insurance, the popular pre-existing condition provision could send insurance companies into a tailspin, because their costs would rise with sicker customers, and that would not be offset by healthy consumers forced to buy insurance.  ‘A lovely call’ from Clinton.  Mr. Trump said in an interview to be shown on “60 Minutes” Sunday that Mrs. Clinton “couldn’t have been nicer” in a congratulatory call she made to concede the election, and that Bill Clinton had complimented him on “one of the most amazing” presidential runs he had ever seen.  “It was a lovely call, and it was a tough call for her — I mean, I can imagine, tougher for her than it would have been for me,” Mr. Trump said. “She couldn’t have been nicer. She just said, ‘Congratulations, Donald, well done.’”  Mr. Trump, who on Thursday said he would seek Mr. Obama’s counsel about the presidency, said he would consider asking for Mr. Clinton’s as well.  Mr. Trump also promised that there would be no lapse in health insurance for millions of Americans covered under the Affordable Care Act when he repeals and replaces the law.  “We’re going to do it simultaneously — it’ll be just fine,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s what I do. I do a good job. You know, I mean, I know how to do this stuff. We’re going to repeal it and replace it. And we’re not going to have, like, a two-day period and we’re not going to have a two-year period where there’s nothing.”  And speaking of olive branches — Mitt Romney  Mr. Trump has quietly reached out to Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee who took an impassioned stand against Mr. Trump during the campaign.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The call came after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday night, according to two people briefed on it, although it was unclear how it went and what was said.  Aides to Mr. Trump and Mr. Romney did not respond to requests for comment.  Gloria Allred eyes the Paula Jones model.  With her eye on the right’s Paula Jones legal crusade of the 1990s, Gloria Allred, the civil rights lawyer representing women who have accused Mr. Trump of sexual assault, is trying to lure the president-elect into a legal battle before he takes office.  Ms. Allred challenged Mr. Trump on Friday to retract his threat to sue his accusers for defaming him and suggested that she might bring a case against him if he refused. She also said that she was prepared to countersue if Mr. Trump made good on the threat.  “President-elect Trump now has the opportunity to act presidential,” Ms. Allred said at a news conference with Summer Zervos, the former contestant on “The Apprentice” who said last month that Mr. Trump tried to seduce her and grabbed her breasts in 2007.  Ms. Allred cited a precedent for suing a sitting president: Ms. Jones.  “Obviously the lawsuit against President Clinton by Paula Jones did proceed while he was in office for actions that were alleged to take place prior to his becoming president,” she said.  The Jones case forced Mr. Clinton into a deposition that resulted in his impeachment on charges of lying under oath about an affair with an intern.  A sobbing Ms. Zervos sat next to Ms. Allred and offered her own solution: “What happened to a good, old-fashioned I’m sorry?”  Mike Pence is in, Chris Christie is out.  Vice President-elect Mike Pence will take the lead on the president-elect’s transition.  Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who is under a cloud after two aides were convicted of conspiring to shut down traffic on the George Washington Bridge in the so-called Bridgegate scandal, moves aside.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump told advisers that he wanted Mr. Pence’s Washington experience and contacts. An executive committee, which will include members of Congress, will advise Mr. Pence as the process moves forward.  See the full story.  Corey Lewandowski is out at CNN, and (unofficially) back in with Trump.  Corey Lewandowski, who was fired as Mr. Trump’s campaign manager and then went to work for CNN, even as he continued to consult with the campaign, resigned Friday from his political commentator role, the network confirmed.  Photo  Mr. Lewandowski is expected to take a position in the Trump administration.  He was seen in Trump Tower on Wednesday immediately after Mr. Trump’s victory, chatting with senior aides and attending meetings. Mr. Lewandowski did not return calls for comment.  Mr. Lewandowski was viewed as a controversial appointment by the network; he had signed a nondisclosure agreement with Mr. Trump that prevented him from criticizing the candidate publicly, and he was still being paid by the campaign while working for CNN.  Chuck Schumer backs Keith Ellison to head of the D.N.C.  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the incoming Democratic leader, threw his weight behind Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota on Friday to be the new chairman of the Democratic National Committee, the clearest sign yet that, in defeat, the party will move to the left.  After losing the working-class Rust Belt to Mr. Trump, Democrats could have recruited an industrial-region populist like Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, who represents the Youngstown area. But Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont quickly backed Mr. Ellison, who is black, Muslim and an ardent progressive.  Two former governors, Howard Dean of Vermont and Martin O’Malley of Maryland, also expressed interest Friday in being the party’s new committee chairman.  Photo  Million Woman March brewing  So much for a warm welcome to Washington.  Groups on social media are trying to coordinate a Million Woman March the day after Mr. Trump’s inauguration in protest of the new president. The march will go from the Lincoln Memorial to the White House on Jan. 21 to show “strength, power and courage.” Men are also encouraged to attend.  “No woman is free unless all women are free,” the organizers of the march wrote on the Facebook page where it is being organized.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  State groups for the march have already been formed for people to coordinate travel to the capital. However, some fear that the idea could become a logistical nightmare coming so close to Inauguration Day because of the lack of hotel rooms and the potential for clashes with Trump supporters  Where will Trump live?  Among the president-elect’s most pressing questions as he prepares to take office is where he should live.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump, a provincial homebody who divides his time among golf courses in Florida and New Jersey and his townhouse apartment in Manhattan, is weighing how much time to spend in Washington, according to two people familiar with his deliberations.  One option is spending weekends in New York and most of the week in Washington. Mr. Trump’s wife, Melania, is ultimately planning to move to Washington, according to one person briefed on the discussions, but their 10-year-old son, Barron, is still in school.  Trump’s problems with women continue.  Mr. Trump may be triumphant, but Gloria Allred isn’t done with him yet.  More than 10 women accused Mr. Trump of sexual assault after a video bragging about his groping habits emerged last month. Ms. Allred, the lawyer who has been working with many of the women, does not appear to be letting the president-elect off the hook.  At 2:30 p.m. Eastern time on Friday, she said that she was going to issue a challenge to Mr. Trump at a news conference with one of his accusers who has already come out publicly to tell her story. Ms. Allred would not reveal the name of the woman before the event or share any details of the challenge.  Before the election, Mr. Trump said that the accusers were all lying and that he might sue them. Ms. Allred told ABC News on Thursday that her clients had no plans to sue Mr. Trump at this point, but that they would countersue if he did so.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Harry Reid weighs in.  Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the departing Democratic leader, added his voice to the postelection statements on the president-elect. Unlike most Democrats, he gave no quarter:  The election of Donald Trump has emboldened the forces of hate and bigotry in America. White nationalists, Vladimir Putin and ISIS are celebrating Donald Trump’s victory, while innocent, law-abiding Americans are wracked with fear — especially African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, Muslim Americans, L.G.B.T. Americans and Asian-Americans. Watching white nationalists celebrate while innocent Americans cry tears of fear does not feel like America.  Bernie Sanders to protesters: Chill.  Photo  Some of the anti-Trump protesters who have taken to the streets this week are supporters of Mr. Sanders, and on Friday the former Democratic presidential candidate reminded them that creating chaos and disorder should not be their goal.  Security is beefed up around Fortress Trump.  Trump Tower, the skyscraper on Fifth Avenue and the home base of the president-elect, has become a fortress in the wake of the election.  The lobby, designated a public space by the City of New York, was closed off on Friday morning as Mr. Trump met with advisers. A large police presence surrounded the building.  The tower was built with a special permit more than 30 years ago. The city granted Mr. Trump extra space in exchange for maintaining public access to the lobby.  Peter Thiel joins the transition.  Peter Thiel, the Silicon Valley libertarian who secretly financed a lawsuit against the website Gawker, was named a member of the Presidential Transition Team Executive Committee on Friday afternoon.
“He doesn’t possess the executive power to reorganize the government at whim,” said Jody Freeman, a law professor at Harvard University who served in the first Obama administration. “There are some minor things presidents can do, in terms of creating new offices in cabinet agencies. But the notion that he can single-handedly abolish agencies is fanciful.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Energy and the Environment  Photo  The first indication of Mr. Trump’s intentions may come as he appoints members of his cabinet, sending signals about his priorities. Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican vice-presidential nominee, has expressed interest in running the Energy Department. In a CNN interview last year, she promised to dismantle it. “If I were in charge of that, it would be a short-term job,” she said.  Mr. Trump has also suggested a significant reshaping of the agency’s role, which includes oversight of the National Nuclear Security Administration and the nation’s nuclear arsenal. Mr. Trump has indicated that he would like the agency to focus chiefly on energy extraction, and some people close to him believe he may choose oil and gas magnate Harold Hamm to run it.  As Mr. Trump prepares to slam the brakes on President Obama’s climate change regulations and ramp up fossil fuel production, he has vowed to gut the Environmental Protection Agency. “We are going to get rid of it in almost every form,” he said.  That would be difficult. Mr. Trump would need an act of Congress to eliminate the agency entirely, Ms. Freeman said. The Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act include specific provisions that give the agency legal powers, and changing that would require action by Congress as well. “Any effort to interfere with that would immediately be challenged in court,” Ms. Freeman said.  Health and Education  Ditching the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Obama’s signature legislative achievement, is close to a certainty.  But not every part of the law can easily be overturned, and some of the initiatives that have changed the way the government pays for health care in the Medicare program are supported by Republicans. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation and the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, both deeply unpopular with congressional Republicans, will probably be eliminated.  Photo  “I imagine they’ll focus on getting rid of the individual and employer mandates, insurance marketplace requirements and Medicaid expansion,” said Lanhee J. Chen, a scholar at the Hoover Institution and a former policy adviser to Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee.  Within the government’s health agencies, Mr. Trump’s campaign also proposed eliminating the Food and Drug Administration’s “food police,” which it said “dictate how the federal government expects farmers to produce fruits and vegetables and even dictates the nutritional content of dog food.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the proposal was quickly taken down from the campaign’s website. The Food Safety Modernization Act of 2011, which strengthened the F.D.A.’s oversight of food, is popular among many Republicans as well as with food manufacturers, tarnished by massive food recalls.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Andy Roth, the vice president for government affairs at the Club for Growth, a conservative advocacy group, praised Mr. Trump’s comments on scaling back the Education Department. Mr. Trump has proposed sending $20 billion to the states for school choice programs.  “Bureaucrats in D.C. don’t know how to provide for an education like a parent can,” Mr. Roth said. But he said he is largely mystified about the president-elect’s plans. “Trump is a huge question mark,” he said. “And we honestly don’t know which way he is going go.”  Economy  The president-elect has vowed to double the nation’s rate of economic growth through a combination of broad tax cuts, new trade policies and smart deregulation.  Photo  But analysts say he is unlikely to undertake a major overhaul of the various government agencies that handle economic affairs, such as the Departments of Treasury, Commerce, Labor, Agriculture, Transportation and Housing. At the Treasury Department, the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, both created under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Protection Law, may have their wings clipped, since neither is popular with congressional Republicans.  “I think Dodd-Frank is the major reason the economy has not grown at the usual pace of recovery following a recession,” said Peter Wallison, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative Washington think tank.  A brief note this week on Mr. Trump’s transition website promised to “dismantle” Dodd-Frank — but few foresee an absolute overhaul since that would require ambitious legislative action in Congress. Even Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, signaled Wednesday that he intends to move cautiously.  Law Enforcement and National Security  Some conservatives may also be disappointed when it comes to Mr. Trump’s approach to the nation’s military and intelligence establishment. Mr. Trump lashed out during the campaign at Mr. Obama’s foreign policy, his handling of wars in the Middle East and the government’s effort on immigration. But the president-elect’s prescription for change is likely to result in more spending, not less.  Photo  Mr. Trump wants to root out waste and abuse at the Department of Defense, even as he calls for increasing the size of the Army to 540,000 active duty soldiers, increasing the Navy to 350 ships and providing the Air Force with 1,200 fighter jets. And he promises to pay for all of that with a “full audit” at the Pentagon that eliminates duplicative bureaucracy and ends unwanted programs.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But history suggests he will fail in any overhaul of military programs, said Amy Zegart, the co-director of the Center for International Security and Cooperation at Stanford University. She predicted that change would be opposed by legions of defense and intelligence bureaucrats, as well as powerful members of Congress whose turf would be threatened.  “Forging change will be much, much harder than he expects,” she said.  At the Justice Department, Mr. Obama significantly expanded efforts to investigate unconstitutional policing and demanded changes in police departments that have shown patterns of excessive force or other abuses. Mr. Trump has not said what changes he was considering but has declared that “the war on our police must end.”  A spokeswoman for the president-elect declined on Thursday to provide any information about Mr. Trump’s thinking about the size and shape of government. For now, conservative activists say they are unsure of what to expect from the new president-elect.  “I would hope that he would embrace some radical program terminations, but I’m not holding my breath,” said Chris Edwards, the editor of a blog for the Cato Institute on downsizing government. In a post on Thursday, Mr. Edwards called Mr. Trump “timid” and noted he had not pledged to eliminate subsidies for schools, farms, housing, energy and transit — cuts that conservatives crave.
Corey Lewandowski, Mr. Trump’s first campaign manager, has also been mentioned for chief of staff, despite having been fired by the campaign in June. But Mr. Trump’s children, who feuded publicly with him during the campaign, may resist.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Two other names being discussed: Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, and David Bossie, a veteran conservative operative who became Mr. Trump’s deputy campaign manager.  The president and the president-elect.  Mr. Trump, a man who once questioned the birthplace of the president, and Mr. Obama, who scorched Mr. Trump as unfit for the Oval Office, met the news media in that esteemed room, and at least for public consumption, let bygones and bygones.  Mr. Trump, who often labeled Mr. Obama the worst president in history during the campaign, this time called him a “very good man.”  For a full account, read here.  Video  Trump on the Hill.  After the White House, it was on to Capitol Hill to meet with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, and the speaker of the House, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin. Mr. Ryan only reluctantly endorsed Mr. Trump, called his attack on a judge of Mexican heritage the “textbook definition” of racism, and then stopped campaigning for him after a video emerged of the candidate bragging about sexual assault.  On Thursday, it was all smiles.  “Donald Trump had one of the most impressive victories we have ever seen, and we’re going to turn that victory into progress for the American people,” Mr. Ryan said, “and we are now talking about how we are going to hit the ground running to get this country turned around and make America great again.”  Mr. Trump added: “We had a very detailed meeting, and we’re going to lower taxes, as you know, health care, we’re going to make it affordable. We are going to do a real job on health care.”  Mr. Ryan then showed off the view from his balcony, pointing out the Old Post Office on Pennsylvania Avenue, which Mr. Trump converted into a luxury hotel.  Mr. Trump planned to spend Thursday night in Washington, aides announced. No word on whether he’ll be in the new hotel.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Meantime, a new first lady arrives.  Michelle Obama welcomed Melania Trump to tea and a tour of the White House residence on Thursday, yet another extraordinary moment as the first lady, who bitterly denounced Mr. Trump and his treatment of women during the presidential campaign, welcomed his wife to her soon-to-be new home.  While Mr. Obama and Mr. Trump held their own 90-minute meeting in the Oval Office, the two women stepped out on the Truman Balcony, with sweeping views of the grounds and the Washington Monument, strolled through the State Floor with the resident curator, and even talked about raising children at the White House, said Josh Earnest, the press secretary.  When they were finished, Mrs. Obama and Mrs. Trump went to the Oval Office to meet their husbands before the Trumps departed for Capitol Hill, Mr. Earnest said.  Last call for health care?  Tens of thousands of Americans are rushing to sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act after Mr. Trump’s victory as revitalized Republicans vow to repeal the law.  Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the secretary of health and human services, reported that more than 100,000 people selected health plans on Wednesday through HealthCare.gov. It was, she said on Twitter Thursday, the “best day yet” in the current open-enrollment period, which began Nov. 1 and ends Jan. 31.  Even though premiums on the Affordable Care Act exchanges have increased sharply in many parts of the country, federal officials say most consumers can still find coverage for less than $100 a month, after subsidies help defray the cost.  Mr. Trump has said he will “completely repeal Obamacare,” but has not said in detail how he would replace it. Instead of the subsidies now available to most people buying insurance through the online marketplace, Mr. Trump wants to allow people to take tax deductions equal to their premiums.  Planning? Nah, that’s bad luck.  “We’ll figure it out on election night.”  That’s what Mr. Trump told his advisers after they pressed him this year to name people to a transition team in-waiting that was supposed to give his campaign the appearance of being serious about winning.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  So if Mr. Trump’s fledgling transition looks a little seat of the pants, well, blame superstition.  Mr. Trump said he did not like the idea of planning ahead because he thought it might jinx him. “It’s bad luck,” he told advisers, according to one senior aide who spoke to Mr. Trump about the matter.  Democrats: To the left, to the left …  They love Bernie Sanders, they adore Elizabeth Warren, but as Democrats regroup from Mrs. Clinton’s defeat, the progressive wing of the party is looking to another candidate to lead the Democratic National Committee: Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota.  Donna Brazile replaced Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz as the committee’s interim leader over the summer after it emerged that the committee was favoring Mrs. Clinton over Mr. Sanders in the Democratic primary contest. Hacked emails released by WikiLeaks also showed that Ms. Brazile had been trying to help Mrs. Clinton.  The Progressive Change Campaign Committee said on Thursday that Democrats would continue losing elections unless they aggressively take on corporate power and pointed to Mr. Ellison, who is one of two Muslims in the House and is co-chairman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus.  “The Democratic establishment had their chance with this election,” said Stephanie Taylor, a co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee. “It’s time for new leadership of the Democratic Party — younger, more diverse, and more ideological — that is hungry to do things differently, like leading a movement instead of dragging people to the polls.”  An immigration lightning rod joins Team Trump.  Kris Kobach, the Kansas secretary of state and an ardent opponent of immigration, has been added to Mr. Trump’s transition team, according to local news reports.  Mr. Kobach, who provided guidance on immigration policy to Mr. Trump during the campaign, will help the president-elect in the weeks before he takes office, according to The Wichita Eagle.  He told the paper he did not expect to get an offer to serve in the Trump administration, but just having him in a formal role in the new Washington could send shudders through the nation’s immigrants. Mr. Kobach has been one of the loudest anti-immigration voices in the Republican Party for years. He added Mr. Trump’s call for a border wall along the southern tier into the party’s platform over the summer.  Photo  A ‘very special’ relationship with Britain.  Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain spoke by telephone on Thursday, affirming the “special relationship” between the two countries and agreeing to work closely together, according to a readout of the call provided by the British Embassy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It was a meeting of the “Brexits”: the prime minister ushered into power after Britons voted to exit the European Union and a president-elect who has proudly proclaimed himself “Mr. Brexit” — as big a political shock as the British vote.  “The prime minister and President-elect Trump agreed that the U.S.-U.K. relationship was very important and very special, and that building on this would be a priority for them both,” said Laura Palts, an embassy spokeswoman. “President-elect Trump set out his close and personal connections with, and warmth for, the U.K.”  Mr. Trump encouraged Brexit and has been supportive of Mrs. May. This year he clashed with David Cameron, Britain’s former prime minister, and Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, after they criticized his proposal to bar Muslims from entering the United States.  But on Thursday Mr. Trump told Mrs. May that Britain was a “very, very special place for me and for our country” and invited her to pay him a visit as soon as possible.  R.I.P., T.P.P.  Republican congressional leaders have confirmed what might seem obvious with Mr. Trump’s triumph: Mr. Obama’s far-reaching trade agreement with 11 Pacific Rim nations is dead.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The Senate majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, said flat-out “No” when reporters asked on Wednesday if the pending Trans-Pacific Partnership — the largest regional trade deal in history — would be considered in the lame duck Congress that convenes next week.  “I think the president-elect made it pretty clear he was not in favor of the current agreement,” Mr. McConnell said. Mr. Trump has the authority “to negotiate better deals, as I think he would put it,” Mr. McConnell added, but that prospect is unlikely given the difficulty of renegotiating a pact at least seven years in the making among a dozen countries.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  One of the agreement’s strongest and best-placed Republican advocates, Representative Kevin Brady of Texas, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, echoed the Senate leader.  “This important agreement is not ready to be considered during the lame duck and will remain on hold until President Trump decides the path forward,” he said.  Pence and Pelosi chat.  The office of Representative Nancy Pelosi said on Thursday that Mr. Pence had reached out on a phone call, and she congratulated him on his win. They agreed to meet in the coming weeks to talk more. Ms. Pelosi, the Democratic leader from California, is acquainted with Mr. Pence from his days in the House, where he was something of a rebel before joining the Republican leadership.  Photo  Lock her up?  Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, expressed interest on Thursday morning in being attorney general, telling CNN, “I certainly have the energy, and there’s probably nobody who knows the Justice Department better than me.”  The next question: Would he actually make good on Mr. Trump’s promise to put Hillary Clinton in jail?  Ms. Conway, the Trump campaign manager, left the door open on Wednesday. So did Mr. Giuliani on Fox News when he said Mr. Obama should not pardon Mrs. Clinton for allegedly mishandling classified information on a private server as secretary of state.  “I don’t like to see America become a country in which we prosecute people, you know, about politics,” he said. “On the other hand, there are deep and disturbing issues there in which if you don’t investigate them — ”  The Fox News hosts finished the sentence: “They’re going to continue.”  Legal analysts say that a Trump attorney general would wield the power to open a new investigation, even with a special prosecutor. But he could not guarantee the outcome.  Of course, maybe Mr. Giuliani won’t be in the Trump administration. He told The Times’s Matt Apuzzo on Wednesday that he was “not interested in returning to government.” Instead, he and his friend Michael B. Mukasey, the former attorney general, would advise Mr. Trump on potential nominees. “Between us, we can locate a lot of really good people.”
In her resignation statement, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, a representative from Florida, said she would continue to fight for Mrs. Clinton from the sidelines.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I know that electing Hillary Clinton as our next president is critical for America’s future,” Ms. Wasserman Schultz said in a statement. “I look forward to serving as a surrogate for her campaign in Florida and across the country to ensure her victory.”  She added, “Going forward, the best way for me to accomplish those goals is to step down as party chair at the end of this convention.”  Donna Brazile, a vice chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, will be the interim chairwoman through the election, the committee said.  Ms. Wasserman Schultz has faced a flurry of negative stories during her five-year tenure as the committee’s chairwoman, with critics charging that she was more focused on promoting her career than on the party, but she had resisted calls to quit.  Ms. Wasserman Schultz announced her resignation after a private meeting with advisers and senior aides to Mrs. Clinton at a hotel here a day before the party’s convention was set to begin. She had faced growing calls for her resignation over the weekend.  “In politics, you need to not only know when to draw your sword, but also when to fall on it,” said James Carville, a longtime friend and adviser to the Clintons.  The breach of the Democratic committee’s emails, made public on Friday by WikiLeaks, offered undeniable evidence of what Mr. Sanders’s supporters had complained about for much of the senator’s contentious primary contest with Mrs. Clinton: that the party was effectively an arm of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign. The messages showed members of the committee’s communications team musing about pushing the narrative that the Sanders campaign was inept and trying to raise questions publicly about whether he was an atheist.  Mr. Sanders said the situation was an “outrage” on Sunday before the resignation was announced, and called for Ms. Wasserman Schultz to step down. Afterward, he said it was the right decision.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The party leadership must also always remain impartial in the presidential nominating process, something which did not occur in the 2016 race,” he said in a statement.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign aides ignored questions as they quickly left a hotel a few minutes after the resignation was announced. Ms. Brazile emerged soon after the Clinton aides had left and said in a brief interview that Ms. Wasserman Schultz had called her Sunday afternoon and asked her to come to the hotel where the Florida delegation was staying.  Convention organizers had expressed nervousness on Sunday about the specter of Ms. Wasserman Schultz appearing onstage at all during the four-day convention. They were worried that what they intended to be a well-choreographed event, which officials hoped would contrast with the sometimes chaotic Republican National Convention, could be marred by Mr. Sanders’s backers booing and heckling her.  Ms. Wasserman Schultz recognized the magnitude of the problem on Saturday and initially planned to offer an apology, one of her advisers said. But it became clear to her on Sunday that contrition was insufficient.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign handled the situation delicately, not wanting the chairwoman to feel intense pressure and dig in. The Clinton aides told Ms. Wasserman Schultz the choice to resign was hers to make, but they gently warned her that she would face jeers from Mr. Sanders’s supporters this week in the convention hall, said the adviser to Ms. Wasserman Schultz, who requested anonymity to discuss private deliberations.  The nudge was enough to force Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s hand.  The Clinton campaign also suggested on Sunday that Russia had been responsible for the leak as part of an effort to help Mr. Trump, who has made flattering comments about President Vladimir V. Putin.  The convention will feature a host of prominent attendees, and Monday will be headlined by speeches by Mr. Sanders and Michelle Obama, the first lady. President Obama and former President Bill Clinton will address the delegates later in the week, bringing the kind of presidential firepower that the Republican convention could not muster because of opposition to Mr. Trump.  The unexpected decision by Mr. Bloomberg to endorse Mrs. Clinton reflected his increasing dismay about the rise of Mr. Trump.  Photo  Mr. Sanders’s supporters were elated by Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s decision, which they said had been long overdue.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Thank God for WikiLeaks,” said Dan O’Neal, a delegate from Arizona who was wearing a “Bernie for President” T-shirt. “The party was stacked from the beginning with Debbie in charge.”  Benjamin T. Jealous, a frequent surrogate for Mr. Sanders and a former president of the N.A.A.C.P., said on Sunday in Philadelphia that the move “allows us to heal and move on.”  But many of Mr. Sanders’s backers were not ready to let go, and their frustration could be seen on the streets here. A large, boisterous crowd of his supporters, chanting “hell, no, D.N.C., we won’t vote for Hillary,” marched toward the site of the Democratic National Convention on Sunday afternoon.  The crowd of more than 1,000 people from as far as Seattle and Florida was much larger than any of the protest marches last week in Cleveland during the Republican convention.  Further angering some members of the party’s left was Mrs. Clinton’s selection of Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia as her running mate, a move that was widely heralded by establishment Democrats but that provoked some backlash on Sunday from members of the party who believed he was not sufficiently liberal.  After the announcement on Friday that Mr. Kaine was joining the ticket, some die-hard supporters of Mr. Sanders complained that the choice of a centrist Democrat was evidence that Mrs. Clinton had merely been paying lip service to the party’s progressive wing. Many were hoping that she would select Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts or Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio if Mr. Sanders were not the choice.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Norman Solomon, a delegate for Mr. Sanders who coordinates the Bernie Delegates Network, said that 90 percent of his delegates had found Mr. Kaine to be an “unacceptable” choice for vice president. Mr. Solomon’s group arrived early in Philadelphia to make its displeasure known.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Secretary Clinton must know that her choice of Kaine can only inflame rather than soothe her relations with the huge constituency of Bernie supporters,” he said.  Mr. Sanders was conspicuously quiet after the pick was announced before breaking his silence on Sunday in a CNN interview. While he spoke highly of Mr. Kaine, he made clear that they had big policy differences.  “Are his political views different than mine? Yes, they are,” Mr. Sanders said. “He is more conservative than I am.”  Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s decision to resign could help tamp down open dissent by Sanders delegates at the convention. Immediately after her announcement, top party leaders praised her work in an effort to show solidarity on the eve of the four-day event.  “I am grateful to Debbie for getting the Democratic Party to this year’s historic convention in Philadelphia, and I know that this week’s events will be a success thanks to her hard work and leadership,” Mrs. Clinton said.  Mr. Obama said in a statement, “For the last eight years, Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz has had my back.”  As Democrats digested the news, Republicans gloated.  The Republican National Committee sent out headlines that depicted the Democratic Party in disarray.  Mr. Trump, who spent much of the day egging on supporters of Mr. Sanders to revolt after the selection of Mr. Kaine, bragged on Twitter that he had always known Ms. Wasserman Schultz was “overrated.”  “The Dems Convention is cracking up, and Bernie is exhausted, no energy left!” Mr. Trump wrote.  The fallout from the resignation could jeopardize Ms. Wasserman Schultz’s seat in Congress, as she faces Tim Canova, a law professor who supports Mr. Sanders, in a primary election next month.
Republicans are entering the next Congress in a fighting stance, seeking to undo much of Mr. Obama’s legacy. And many of them say they are looking forward to sparring with Mr. Schumer after years of enduring spats between Mr. McConnell and Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the departing minority leader.  Photo  “The Senate is really like a family,” said Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee. “And if the two leading members of the family have a sour relationship, it’s pretty hard on all of us.”  He added: “Chuck and Mitch have the opportunity to together be very strong leaders who can make a real difference in the Senate. They both value the Senate as the most important institution in the country for achieving big things. They both understand that this is a job that is very hard to get and very hard to do, and while they are there, it ought to amount to something good for the country.”  At the same time, Mr. Schumer may find himself with more in common with his fellow New Yorker in the White House than most expect. Both men have long talked about major spending on infrastructure, and both believe that American companies that move jobs overseas should face punishment.  But dealing with Republicans is only part of Mr. Schumer’s challenge. Senate Democrats will be largely cleaved into those facing re-election in two years — many from red states like Indiana, North Dakota and Montana — and a liberal flank empowered by the popularity of Ms. Warren and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.  The complexities of his new role, one in which listening is required as much as talking and self-interest has to give way to consensus, would have once seemed ill suited to Mr. Schumer.  “Most people don’t evolve,” said Howard Wolfson, the New York political operative who worked on Mr. Schumer’s first race for the Senate, in 1998. “He is someone who has, in ways that enable him to be more successful than he would have been. If you think about him circa 1998, he was very focused on press, somewhat parochial in his view of the world and very partisan. He has evolved into someone who is very focused on results rather than flash, and very much able and interested in working with the other party to get things done.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Schumer has also ceded the spotlight, on the Sunday shows and even on major legislation, to colleagues with more pressing political needs. He has even learned to work with Republicans, hammering out deals while riding a stationary bike in the Senate gym.  Photo  While still the same un-self-conscious, mildly dorky Brooklyn Chuck — he frequently answers his colleagues’ questions by singing lyrics from “Hamilton” and is not above picking up an errant lo mein noodle that has fallen into his shoes with chopsticks and popping it into his mouth — he is now also self-actualized Chuck.  “I’ve become comfortable with who I am,” Mr. Schumer said. “I was a kid from Brooklyn when I got here. I thought, ‘What are they going to think of me?’”  His first Washington housemates, Representatives Marty Russo of Illinois and George Miller and Leon E. Panetta of California, helped him. “They brought me into the house and taught me how to be a team player,” he said.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Schumer has ascended through a combination of his relentless work habits and his ability to raise vast amounts of money. His appetite for calling candidates, colleagues, donors and staff members on his laughably retro flip phone at all hours, and his willingness to attend fund-raisers in far-flung places like Skaneateles, N.Y., on a Friday night, have earned him a rare kind of admiration.  “We like to say Schumer is a verb,” said Senator Bob Casey, Democrat of Pennsylvania.  In 2010, after Democrats maintained control of the Senate, defying the Tea Party wave that swamped the House, Mr. Reid created a leadership position for Mr. Schumer as a reward. Mr. Schumer seized that platform to build a war room for both policy and politics, building up many deposits in his favor bank, particularly from newer Senate Democrats who helped him lock up the top leadership slot as soon as Mr. Reid announced his retirement last year.  Even for members who opposed him, the way Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, did on earmarks, Mr. Schumer has shown understanding.  “Chuck disagreed with me, but one day he stopped me and said, ‘Listen, I know you feel strongly about this,’” she said. “‘If you feel you are getting trouble on this, just give me a holler, and I will block and tackle.’ That’s when it occurred to me he was paying attention to a lot of us, not just those that could raise money.”  Photo  Mr. Schumer, partisan but often not particularly liberal, has also forged bonds with Republicans like Mr. Alexander and Senator John Cornyn of Texas along the way. On the Judiciary Committee, he has worked with Mr. Cornyn to increase voting in the military and, most recently, on a bill to allow the families of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to sue Saudi Arabia.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Schumer’s greater challenge may be across the Rotunda. He is hopeful that he and the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, will bond over their love of tax policy. Both also support legislation to bring home hundreds of billions of dollars in corporate profits now parked overseas.  “Ryan and I already have a pretty good relationship,” he said.  Another open question is the degree to which Mr. Schumer will be able to maintain his hard-charging style as his responsibilities expand. Now, after Senate votes, the real work begins, as staff members pile into his office at assigned time slots until well after midnight to present an issue of the week. From a high-level official who is scheduled to testify on Capitol Hill, to remote maritime issues on Long Island, to the latest twist in a tax bill — all are discussed before Mr. Schumer, who cross-examines each messenger until he is satisfied.  Where did they get their information? What are the fine points of the policy? Which reporter should be clued in to the story?  Staff members vie for an early spot. The unlucky ones go home and make dinner and read their children “Harry Potter” before returning for a 10:30 p.m. grilling.  Mr. Schumer’s biggest leadership obstacle may be his hyper-preoccupation with New York. Racing to the Capitol off the last possible shuttle flight may no longer be an option. His biggest stand against the White House this year was when he pushed to override Mr. Obama’s veto of the Sept. 11 lawsuit bill, a hometown hit. He will have to balance the greater good of his members, many of them endangered moderates, with parochial interests.  “I’m from Brooklyn,” Mr. Schumer said. “Sometimes it helps me, sometimes it hurts me, but if I tried to be someone else, I’d be worse than whatever I am.”
The gathering, held without aides or journalists present, stretched into a nearly three-hour dinner over pork chops and gravy, fried okra and rice. After dessert of apple pie, Mrs. Clinton encouraged the women to organize and travel the country with her campaign.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You are the mothers of the children who are dying in the streets,” Mrs. Clinton told the group, Ms. McBath recalled. “You have a lot of power individually,” she said. “But collectively, you need to come together. The country needs to hear from you.”  Since then, these mothers, many of whom did not know one another before the Clinton campaign flew them to Chicago to convene, have blanketed the primary states, appearing with Mrs. Clinton in churches and barbershops from Ohio to South Carolina. They starred in an ad that aired in Cleveland, Chicago and St. Louis. And the campaign has paid their travel expenses so they could attend the Democratic presidential debates.  “There I was, sitting behind Donna Brazile and in front of Cornel West,” said Geneva Reed-Veal, the mother of Sandra Bland, who died in police custody in Texas last year after an altercation with a state trooper. “Nobody knew we were there.”  Photo  The Clinton campaign named this sisterhood forged in the shared loss of a child the “Mothers of the Movement,” and they have become an unlikely linchpin of Mrs. Clinton’s success in the Democratic primary. At campaign stops, Mrs. Clinton introduces them as “a group of mothers who belong to a club no one ever wants to join.” The mothers will arrive in New York this week to help Mrs. Clinton compete in the primary on Tuesday.  Having these women by her side has provided Mrs. Clinton with powerful and deeply sympathetic character witnesses as she makes her case to African-American voters. And they have given her campaign, an often cautious and poll-tested operation, a raw, human and sometimes gut-wrenching feeling.  The presence of the mothers has also proved a shrewd political move, influencing black leaders and lawmakers to back Mrs. Clinton.  “Those not supporting her are reluctant to go against her, because we led the marches and the rallies on these things and have worked very closely with the mothers,” said the Rev. Al Sharpton, whose National Action Network is hosting Mrs. Clinton and her opponent in the Democratic primary, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, for a discussion of civil rights issues at its annual conference this week in New York. “It certainly influences how we related to her campaign,” added Mr. Sharpton, who has not endorsed a candidate.  On Wednesday, Mrs. Clinton received the biggest applause of an otherwise lukewarm reception at Mr. Sharpton’s convention when she introduced Sybrina Fulton, the mother of Mr. Martin, and Gwen Carr, the mother of Mr. Garner.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Sanders has the support of Mr. Garner’s daughter, Erica; the director Spike Lee; Mr. West; and other prominent black figures, and he talks frequently about being arrested in the 1960s while marching for civil rights. But the mothers have allowed Mrs. Clinton to “really tap into the pulse of the black community,” said Representative Yvette D. Clarke, Democrat of New York, who has endorsed Mrs. Clinton.  “The other candidate on the Democratic side did not reach out to us,” Annette Nance-Holt, whose 16-year-old son, Blair Holt, was shot on a Chicago bus in 2007, said at a campaign event last month. She explained starkly that she was not swayed by Mr. Sanders’s promise of free college “because my child is dead.”  Mrs. Clinton’s outreach to the women began early, even before she officially announced she was running for president, and has continued throughout her campaign.  In December, Ms. Reed-Veal, the mother of Ms. Bland, received a Christmas card in the mail. “I know this is the first holiday without your baby,” the neat cursive handwriting read. “Just know, I’m thinking of you.” It was signed, “Hillary.” She received another note from Mrs. Clinton when a grand jury declined to indict anyone in her daughter’s death.  Sign Up for the Race/Related Newsletter Join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of New York Times journalists. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That kind of personal touch inspired Ms. Reed-Veal to join Mrs. Clinton’s campaign. At a black church in Milwaukee last month, sitting on stage next to the candidate, she told her story and implored the city’s black residents to vote for Mrs. Clinton.  “Drive up to the corner where that young man is standing with his pants hanging down, and if he is 18 or older, take his hand and make him vote,” Ms. Reed-Veal said. “Make that young man know that people died for him. Make him understand that.”  For many of the mothers, supporting Mrs. Clinton meant absolving her of the pain caused by policies of her husband, former President Bill Clinton, including a 1994 crime bill that built more prisons, put 100,000 additional police officers on the streets and increased sentences for nonviolent drug offenses.  Ms. Garner, who made an ad for Mr. Sanders, said Mrs. Clinton was “constantly throwing around my dad’s name” but had previously “called people like my dad ‘superpredators.’” Mrs. Clinton used the term in 1996 to describe urban gang members and has since said she regrets doing so. And last week, Mr. Clinton faced intense backlash after he drowned out the chants of Black Lives Matter protesters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “She’s not her husband,” Ms. Nance-Holt said in an interview. “She’s her own woman.”  The mothers must also contend with critics who say that Mrs. Clinton’s early and frequent outreach is a cynical ploy to woo black voters, who have largely swayed the primary in her favor. “People go around and say, ‘You’re being pimped by the secretary,’” Ms. Reed-Veal said. “Who in the heck is going to exploit us?”  Mrs. Clinton shows a different side when she is around the mothers. She talks less and seems more maternal, growing teary and turning to Scripture in response to the women’s pain. “Let us not grow weary of doing good, because in due time we will harvest if we stay focused,” she often says, paraphrasing Galatians 6:9.  “No one can deny that Bernie Sanders has just as much sympathy and compassion, but God put us in all sorts of packages,” said Representative Charles B. Rangel of New York, who is supporting Mrs. Clinton. “He doesn’t look like compassion. He looks like a guy raising hell on TV.”  The events at which the mothers appear unleash emotional reactions. At Tabernacle Community Baptist Church in Milwaukee last month, a woman in the congregation wailed as the other mothers told their stories. “When we heard those screams, we knew,” said Ms. Nance-Holt, who had driven from Chicago to campaign for Mrs. Clinton. “That was the sound when your child has been murdered.”  After the event, the campaign brought the woman backstage to meet Mrs. Clinton. The candidate listened intently to her story, and then promised to follow up.
NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
Photo  The social and political fissures that have left Americans walled off from one another along lines of race, class, education, gender and geography played out in stark ways in this election, a contest that left people pessimistic about the future of their country and uninspired with their choices of who should lead it.  Eight years after the election of the first African-American president held the promise of breaking down the country’s deep and longstanding racial divisions, American society seemed as polarized as ever, according to surveys of early voters and exit polls conducted by Edison Research.  One thing most voters shared was an overriding sense of disgust, even if they were split bitterly over which candidate repelled them more. Significant numbers of voters said the thought of either candidate in the White House frightened them.  Donald J. Trump’s coalition was overwhelmingly white, and leaned toward male and older voters. He won whites without college degrees by more than two to one — a larger margin than any candidate since at least 1980. His support from rural voters was nearly double Hillary Clinton’s.  Mrs. Clinton was lifted, by contrast, by women, urban voters and those with more education. She also held onto the people who formed the backbone of President Obama’s coalition in both 2008 and 2012, though in lesser numbers: blacks, Hispanics, unmarried women and young voters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Neither candidate was viewed favorably; more than half of voters saw Mrs. Clinton unfavorably and six in 10 had an unfavorable opinion of Mr. Trump.  Photo  The quality that mattered most to voters was the ability to bring needed change, cited by nearly four in 10 voters. Mr. Trump won these voters by a huge margin. Experience and good judgment were each cited as the most important quality by about one in five voters, and Mrs. Clinton won these voters by large margins.  Close to four in 10 said they would be scared if Mr. Trump were elected; three in 10 said the same about Mrs. Clinton.  Uneasiness extended well beyond the state of politics. Americans expressed concern about their financial well-being, their children’s futures and the fitness and trustworthiness of their leaders.  Three in five voters said the country was seriously on the wrong track and about the same number said the economy was either not good or poor. Two-thirds said their personal financial situation was either worse or the same as it was four years ago. About one in three voters said they expected life to be worse for the next generation.  Mr. Trump’s unusual assault on the impartiality of the country’s elections appeared to have an effect, but mostly among his supporters. Nearly seven in 10 of Mrs. Clinton’s voters were very confident that the votes in their state would be counted accurately. But fewer than three in 10 of Mr. Trump’s supporters said they were very confident.  Some demographic trends seem to be hardening. Twelve years ago, George W. Bush made inroads with Hispanic voters who many Republicans confidently said would form the basis of an enduring conservative majority. But today’s Republican Party is repelling them. Mr. Trump’s performance among Hispanics, at 29 percent of the vote, was similar to Mitt Romney’s in 2012, but far below Mr. Bush’s 44 percent support in 2004.  Americans were in a foul mood about the state of their country’s politics. Nearly half of voters were dissatisfied with the way the federal government is working and another quarter were angry. Only a quarter were satisfied, and far fewer were enthusiastic.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The results contained warning signs for Republicans, who concluded after the 2012 election that changing demographics would reduce them to a permanent minority party unless they improved how blacks and Hispanics viewed them.  Mr. Trump’s nomination seemed only to exacerbate those trends, with his hostility toward many foreigners, his refusal at times to dissociate himself from avowed racists and his plan to ban Muslims from entering the United States.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Most voters rejected one policy proposal Mr. Trump vowed to pursue from the beginning and never backed away from: building a wall on the southern border with Mexico. A majority opposed that plan. Seven in 10 said that most undocumented immigrants working in the United States should be offered a chance to apply for legal status.  Immigrants who have become citizens favored Mrs. Clinton by a ratio of two to one.  Though immigration or terrorism did not rank at the top of most voters’ concerns, the majority of voters who said immigration or terrorism was their top issue favored Mr. Trump.  Most voters who cited the economy or foreign policy as top priorities backed Mrs. Clinton, seemingly rejecting Mr. Trump’s insistence that his business background gave him a superior set of negotiating skills.  A majority of voters said they approved of the job Mr. Obama was doing as president, and those voters backed Mrs. Clinton by huge margins.  But neither Mr. Trump nor Mrs. Clinton inspired voters in the way that Mr. Obama did. Four in 10 voters said they strongly favored the candidate they supported, and a quarter of voters said they were motivated by dislike for the other candidate. In 2012, about two-thirds of voters said they strongly favored their candidate.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Before the election, it was clear that Democrats were looking at the very real prospect of scrapping the filibuster to keep Republicans from blocking the Supreme Court nominees of a President Hillary Clinton.  Now the tables are turned. It is the Republicans who will control the White House, Senate and House — the coveted Washington trifecta. And that raises a crucial question: If Democrats in the even more narrowly divided Senate embrace the filibuster to block what could be a flood of legislation, would Republicans respond by eliminating the 60-vote threshold in order to push their priorities through on simple majority votes?  In the afterglow of their election success, Republicans prefer not to discuss this unpleasant possibility. They would rather rhapsodize about a sunny legislative future in which the two parties work in harmony, negating the need for all those troublesome Senate cloture votes to try to break filibusters (a tactic that they, in fact, employed very effectively to stymie President Obama).  “I think what the American people are looking for is results,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who will retain his majority leader title by virtue of surprising Republican victories, told reporters. “And to get results in the Senate, as all of you know, it requires some Democratic participation and cooperation.”  At the same time, Mr. McConnell said that repealing the Affordable Care Act was a “pretty high item on our agenda,” and he predicted quick action. “The sooner we can go in a different direction, the better,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Democrats are certain to oppose that. Even if some red-state Democrats up for re-election in 2018 join Republicans, the repeal effort will most likely remain short of the 60 votes now needed.  Republicans can use a special process known as reconciliation to avoid a filibuster. But that effort would take well into 2017 and would require passage of a congressional budget resolution, among other steps.  Presumably, the newly installed president, Donald J. Trump, along with eager House Republicans and impatient legions of Trump supporters, would want to see the law repealed well before then, and they could apply enough pressure to lead to the filibuster’s demise.  Another development could spur a filibuster fight even sooner. Mr. Trump is likely to move quickly to fill the Supreme Court seat that Senate Republicans have kept empty for more than eight months.  Senate Democrats say they hope that Mr. Trump follows tradition by consulting with them on his Supreme Court choice, and that he picks a nominee both parties are able to support. But they remain very unhappy about how Republicans treated Merrick B. Garland, the highly regarded federal appeals court judge whose nomination by Mr. Obama in March is now dead.  Democrats may want some payback. So if Mr. Trump picks a conservative whom Democrats find objectionable, it is possible that they will do whatever they can to impede the choice, including a filibuster.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That could lead to a retaliatory move by Republicans to eliminate the filibuster against Supreme Court nominees, the only judicial candidates exempted from a change Democrats engineered in 2013 that allowed filibusters against nominees to be broken by a simple majority vote.  Mr. McConnell would not tip his hand this week on how he would respond to such a Democratic approach. But he did not rule out the so-called nuclear option: changing rules via a procedural vote on the floor instead of the 67 votes officially required.  “I would not anticipate any particular strategy that the Democrats might employ to defeat it or what we might do in reaction to that,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. McConnell is what is known on Capitol Hill as an institutionalist, a strong believer in the traditions and practices of the Senate. He was very critical of the decision by Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, who is retiring this year, to rally his party into limiting filibusters against nominees in response to Republican delaying tactics.  Mr. McConnell has said repeatedly that it is crucial to American democracy to respect the special rights of the minority party in the Senate, and that it would be a mistake to limit the filibuster, since the decision could backfire if his party fell out of power.  “I don’t think we should act as if we’re going to be in the majority forever,” he said.  It is not clear that Mr. McConnell, even if he wanted to, could round up enough votes from his own party to curtail the Senate filibuster, since some veteran Republican senators such as Susan Collins of Maine would probably be opposed.  However, if Senate Democrats were able to frustrate the unified Republican government through the filibuster, the forces behind Mr. Trump’s election and agenda — among his top priorities are major tax cuts and tough border security measures — would be likely to push Mr. McConnell and his colleagues to get rid of it.  House conservatives and other top Republicans were already agitating for an end to the filibuster last year, and that was when Mr. Obama was still certain to veto bills he opposed.  In addition, the 2018 electoral landscape is so favorable to Republicans that they are very likely to retain power for the entire four years of Mr. Trump’s term, giving them a huge opening to rewrite the federal statute book if left unimpeded.  Mr. McConnell loves the Senate rules and would be loath to change them. But he did not reverse the Democrats and restore the 60-vote threshold on most nominees when the Republicans took control in 2015. He might ultimately be persuaded to scuttle the filibuster on Supreme Court nominees and even on legislation if he felt it was justified and the time was right.
“Never Trump” has become “Maybe Trump.” But whether he would have them is another matter.  Mr. Trump, a man known to nurse grudges long after doing so is beneficial, has boasted for months that he has a better understanding of how to best serve the nation’s security interests than nearly anyone who has made policy in the area for the past decade. At the same time, his transition team faces the daunting task of filling hundreds of jobs in a constellation of national security agencies.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At stake is more than a parlor game about who gets what job. Personnel decisions by Mr. Trump and his team will help determine both the course of the administration’s foreign policy and whether the president-elect will hew to the themes of his campaign — a suspicion of alliances, skepticism of foreign intervention and admiration for authoritarian figures like President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Some of these views have been embraced by some of Mr. Trump’s current advisers, including Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general and the former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency.  Such positions are generally anathema in Republican foreign policy circles largely dominated by hawkish former George W. Bush administration officials — from Eliot A. Cohen, a former State Department official, to Stephen J. Hadley, Mr. Bush’s national security adviser.  There is some common ground, particularly on counterterrorism policy. For instance, Mr. Trump has repeatedly praised the brutal interrogation methods the Bush administration used against Qaeda suspects, including waterboarding. “Torture works,” Mr. Trump said during a campaign stop in February. Most former Bush administration officials insist that the methods, used by the C.I.A., did not constitute torture.  Since the election was resolved early Wednesday, there have been at least informal contacts between the two factions, according to several people in both camps who refused to be identified. One person who is helping Mr. Trump’s transition team said the group was already receiving résumés from former Republican officials, including some of the signers of two open letters this year excoriating Mr. Trump’s foreign policy views. At the same time, the transition team has also made unofficial overtures to some of the people who signed the two letters — one in March and the second in August.  For now, Mr. Trump is relying on a small circle of advisers to begin considering candidates for national security positions. General Flynn openly disdains the views of many in the Republican national security establishment, especially those who served in senior positions during the George W. Bush administration. It was these people, he said during an interview shortly before the election, who helped push the United States into “too many conflicts that just seem too perpetual.”  “Mr. Trump, that’s what he wants to change,” he said.  People close to Mr. Trump’s team said that view did not seem to have changed significantly since Election Day. Representative Devin Nunes, the California Republican who is the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, has spoken to General Flynn, and he said the transition team seemed to be focused on filling the administration with many retired military officers and intelligence analysts who had operational roles in Iraq and Afghanistan.  “There’s no shortage of folks who have fought in war zones and were in the I.C. and are now out who are capable,” Mr. Nunes said, using an abbreviation for the intelligence community.  He also suggested that the transition team would not look kindly on those who once opposed Mr. Trump — people he referred to as the “elites” of the “Acela corridor” between Washington and New York.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “A lot of people never thought he would win the nomination, and a lot of people thought he would not win the presidency,” Mr. Nunes said. “And a lot of these people are not in a position to be in the next administration, and that’s refreshing.”  William Inboden, who worked at the National Security Council for President George W. Bush and was one of 50 people to sign the August letter, said he would not completely rule out working in a Trump administration.  “Any patriotic American who is asked to serve our country should be willing to do so and should give serious consideration to whatever position is offered,” said Mr. Inboden, who is now a professor at the University of Texas.  At the same time, he said, “the Trump team will have to decide how magnanimous they want to be toward the dissenters.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mary Beth Long, a former C.I.A. officer and assistant secretary of defense in the George W. Bush administration and another signer of the August letter, said she reversed her position on Mr. Trump at a campaign rally in Charlotte, N.C., about a month ago.  She said in an interview that she changed her views because she thought Mr. Trump and his campaign had “matured” over the past several months. She said that she was not seeking a job in the new administration nor expecting to be asked.  Ms. Long said that if experienced, respected Republican national security figures like Mr. Hadley, George W. Bush’s former national security adviser, were offered top jobs, and accepted them, it would provide cover and comfort to other Republicans who might otherwise balk at joining the Trump team.  Mr. Hadley, in a brief interview on Thursday, declined to comment on the speculation about his being a candidate for defense secretary or another top job in the Trump administration.  The March letter, coordinated by Mr. Cohen, the former State Department official, called Mr. Trump’s vision of American influence and power in the world “wildly inconsistent and unmoored in principle,” swinging “from isolationism to military adventurism within the space of one sentence.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It was signed by 122 people.  Mr. Cohen said he did not expect to work for Mr. Trump. “People like me will not be asked to serve,” he said. While he stopped short of ruling it out, on the grounds of “you never rule out something that a president asks you to do,” he added: “It won’t happen to me, and I don’t want it to.”  Peter Feaver, a former George W. Bush administration official who teaches at Duke University, said he believed that the Trump administration would probably blacklist the signers. “That was the price people believed they were paying when they signed those letters,” he said.  Mr. Feaver said that even if the administration excluded everyone on both letters, there would still be an adequate pool of Republican foreign policy experts from which to choose. He also said the administration could quietly consult people who are blacklisted but who have particular expertise on a specific subject.  But Omarosa Manigault, the Trump campaign’s director of African-American outreach and a contestant on one of the early seasons of Mr. Trump’s reality show, “The Apprentice,” said at his election night party that the campaign is keeping an “enemies” list.  “It’s so great our enemies are making themselves clear so that when we get into the White House, we know where we stand,” she told the Independent Journal Review. Ms. Manigault was referring to Senator Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina Republican and a vocal critic of Mr. Trump, but several of the “Never Trump” former officials made reference to her comments in interviews over the past two days.  A big question for some is how much Mr. Trump intends to conduct a foreign policy that mirrors his campaign talk. On Wednesday, Mr. Trump reportedly reassured President Park Geun-hye of South Korea in a telephone call that he would maintain America’s security commitment to Seoul. During an interview with The New York Times in March, he had said that both South Korea and Japan needed to pay far more of the cost of stationing troops in those countries, or he would consider withdrawing them.  “We will be steadfast and strong with respect to working with you to protect against the instability in North Korea,” Mr. Trump said, according to a statement from Ms. Park’s office.  Eric Edelman, a former top aide to Vice President Dick Cheney and a former Pentagon official, has repeatedly criticized Mr. Trump’s fitness to be president. He said he could not imagine the Trump team calling him, and he said he would not serve if asked.  But Mr. Edelman, 65, said he had counseled many younger Republican former security officials to keep an open mind — especially if they fear that it could be years before they have another chance to get a job in a Republican administration.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “People in my position can’t pass moral judgment on younger colleagues,” he said.
• Fliers were distributed to trick college students. The Bangor Daily News reports that were fliers left on the campus of Bates College, in Maine, telling students that if they wanted to vote in Lewiston, they would have to pay to change their driver’s licenses and re-register any vehicle in the city. These sorts of hoaxes are common on college campuses.  • A mayor posted a message with an incorrect date for Election Day. Jefferson Riley, the Republican mayor of Mansfield, Ga., posted a message on his Facebook page: “Remember the voting days: Republicans vote on Tuesday, 11/8 and Democrats vote on Wednesday, 11/9.”  He soon deleted the post.  Jeana Hyde, the city clerk in Mansfield, confirmed that Mayor Riley had made the post on his personal account. She said that while she couldn’t speak for the mayor, she believed that the post had been a joke, “but I really don’t know.”  “He’s a good man; he’s a good mayor,” she said. “And good people do crazy stuff sometimes.”  Needless to say, Tuesday is Electing Day for all Americans, regardless of their political affiliations.  Misinformation  Other falsehoods are spread by seemingly well-meaning entities — corporate accounts and misinformed individuals — who trumpet claims that turn out not to be true.  Here were some Election Day examples:  • An inaccurate guide was distributed to voters. Urban Outfitters on Monday tweeted an Election Day guide that contained wrong information, telling voters that they needed a “voter’s registration card” along with their identification to vote. There is not a single state that requires such a card.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The retailer has since corrected its guide.  • Incorrect information was circulating at the polls. Anni O’Connor, 53, of Paradise Valley, Ariz., reported on The New York Times’s Facebook page that she overheard a woman in line at her polling place say that all her friends had voted online already. Ms. O’Connor, who had been an independent voter for many years but registered as a Democrat to support Hillary Clinton in this year’s primary, said she told the woman to alert her friends that they had not voted.  There is no state in which votes can be submitted online, though a few states make exceptions for military and overseas voters.  • A much-shared tweet about election workers being fired in Florida got some things right, but got key details wrong. Even when people seem eager to help spread the truth, there’s often misinformation given out. For instance, look at this tweet from Adam D. Brown, a Republican politician:  While Mr. Brown is correct that two Florida election clerks were removed from their duties on Tuesday, it was in Broward County, not Miami-Dade.  Tonya Edwards, a spokeswoman for the Broward County elections supervisor, confirmed that two clerks had been removed from their duties before noon, and had been replaced by other poll workers.  The clerks were removed, Ms. Edwards said, because “they were not adhering to our election policies and procedures as they were trained.”  Asked to elaborate, she said that they had “obstructed and interfered” with the voting process but could not give any more information. She said that the episode had not ended up affecting anyone’s ability to vote.  • CNN corrected a tweet from Mr. Trump. The Republican nominee tweeted on Tuesday that Utah officials had reported problems with voting machines across the country.  Later, Jake Tapper, a CNN anchor, addressed Mr. Trump’s tweet during a live broadcast.  “CNN is not reporting that,” Mr. Tapper said. “The problem is, the problem’s across the county. A county. Not a country, as Mr. Trump tweeted.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • A tweet about a “rigged” voting machine in Philadelphia was shared more than 11,000 times. But it was user error, according to ProPublica’s Electionland project.  A Few Tips for Spotting a Fake  On Election Day and in the days afteward, Snopes and BuzzFeed, two operations that vigilantly debunk fake news sites, will be useful.  First, a note: A growing tendency to dive into our own echo chambers and construct our personal versions of the truth on social media has been destructive to the ability to call out misinformation online. A post that contains an opinion you disagree with isn’t necessarily “fake” or “inaccurate.” We’re looking for stories that seem designed to misinform the reader.  Here’s a quick primer for spotting fake news:  • Check the account history of the source. One red flag is usually the number of posts and the span of time the account has been active. Is the story one of 50 coming from a Facebook account that was created just last week? It warrants a deeper look.  • Images are often reused from one live event to another to deceive people. Do a reverse-image search with a service like TinEye. The site should tell you if the photo has been used elsewhere.  • Check for context. Distortion is a powerful tactic used by sites designed to mislead the public. Images, videos and text snippets will be chopped, twisted and stuffed into a new headline to fit an inflammatory new narrative.  In one example cited in a recent BuzzFeed study, a site called Freedom Daily wrote fake details around a months-old video to make it seem like two white men had been beaten and set on fire by supporters of the Black Lives Matter Movement. The story was, in fact, a dispute between two co-workers, and BuzzFeed found that it had nothing to do with racially motivated violence.  But it got a lot of shares.
The United States government, which received the report in July, sharply rejected its charges, administration and military officials said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The report was distributed to lawyers at the White House, Pentagon and State Department and to the commander of the detention facility at Guantánamo, Gen. Jay W. Hood. The New York Times recently obtained a memorandum, based on the report, that quotes from it in detail and lists its major findings.  It was the first time that the Red Cross, which has been conducting visits to Guantánamo since January 2002, asserted in such strong terms that the treatment of detainees, both physical and psychological, amounted to torture. The report said that another confidential report in January 2003, which has never been disclosed, raised questions of whether "psychological torture" was taking place.  The Red Cross said publicly 13 months ago that the system of keeping detainees indefinitely without allowing them to know their fates was unacceptable and would lead to mental health problems.  The report of the June visit said investigators had found a system devised to break the will of the prisoners at Guantánamo, who now number about 550, and make them wholly dependent on their interrogators through "humiliating acts, solitary confinement, temperature extremes, use of forced positions." Investigators said that the methods used were increasingly "more refined and repressive" than learned about on previous visits.  "The construction of such a system, whose stated purpose is the production of intelligence, cannot be considered other than an intentional system of cruel, unusual and degrading treatment and a form of torture," the report said. It said that in addition to the exposure to loud and persistent noise and music and to prolonged cold, detainees were subjected to "some beatings." The report did not say how many of the detainees were subjected to such treatment.  Asked about the accusations in the report, a Pentagon spokesman provided a statement saying, "The United States operates a safe, humane and professional detention operation at Guantánamo that is providing valuable information in the war on terrorism."  It continued that personnel assigned to Guantánamo "go through extensive professional and sensitivity training to ensure they understand the procedures for protecting the rights and dignity of detainees."  The conclusions by the inspection team, especially the findings involving alleged complicity in mistreatment by medical professionals, have provoked a stormy debate within the Red Cross committee. Some officials have argued that it should make its concerns public or at least aggressively confront the Bush administration.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The International Committee of the Red Cross, which is based in Geneva and is separate from the American Red Cross, was founded in 1863 as an independent, neutral organization intended to provide humanitarian protection and assistance for victims of war.  Its officials are able to visit prisoners at Guantánamo under the kind of arrangement the committee has made with governments for decades. In exchange for exclusive access to the prison camp and meetings with detainees, the committee has agreed to keep its findings confidential. The findings are shared only with the government that is detaining people.  Beatricé Mégevand-Roggo, a senior Red Cross official, said in an interview that she could not say anything about information relayed to the United States government because "we do not comment in any way on the substance of the reports we submit to the authorities."  Ms. Mégevand-Roggo, the committee's delegate-general for Europe and the Americas, acknowledged that the issue of confidentiality was a chronic and vexing one for the organization. "Many people do not understand why we have these bilateral agreements about confidentiality," she said. "People are led to believe that we are a fig leaf or worse, that we are complicit with the detaining authorities."  She added, "It's a daily dilemma for us to put in the balance the positive effects our visits have for detainees against the confidentiality."  Antonella Notari, a veteran Red Cross official and spokeswoman, said that the organization frequently complained to the Pentagon and other arms of the American government when government officials cite the Red Cross visits to suggest that there is no abuse at Guantánamo. Most statements from the Pentagon in response to queries about mistreatment at Guantánamo do, in fact, include mention of the visits.  In a recent interview with reporters, General Hood, the commander of the detention and interrogation facility at Guantánamo, also cited the committee's visits in response to questions about treatment of detainees. "We take everything the Red Cross gives us and study it very carefully to look for ways to do our job better," he said in his Guantánamo headquarters, adding that he agrees "with some things and not others."  "I'm satisfied that the detainees here have not been abused, they've not been mistreated, they've not been tortured in any way," he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Scott Horton, a New York lawyer, who is familiar with some of the Red Cross's views, said the issue of medical ethics at Guantánamo had produced "a tremendous controversy in the committee." He said that some Red Cross officials believed it was important to maintain confidentiality while others believed the United States government was misrepresenting the inspections and using them to counter criticisms.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Horton, who heads the human rights committee of the Bar Association of the City of New York, said the Red Cross committee was considering whether to bring more senior officials to Washington and whether to make public its criticisms.  The report from the June visit said the Red Cross team found a far greater incidence of mental illness produced by stress than did American medical authorities, much of it caused by prolonged solitary confinement. It said the medical files of detainees were "literally open" to interrogators.  The report said the Biscuit team met regularly with the medical staff to discuss the medical situations of detainees. At other times, interrogators sometimes went directly to members of the medical staff to learn about detainees' conditions, it said.  The report said that such "apparent integration of access to medical care within the system of coercion" meant that inmates were not cooperating with doctors. Inmates learn from their interrogators that they have knowledge of their medical histories and the result is that the prisoners no longer trust the doctors.  Asked for a response, the Pentagon issued a statement saying, "The allegation that detainee medical files were used to harm detainees is false." The statement said that the detainees were "enemy combatants who were fighting against U.S. and coalition forces."  "It's important to understand that when enemy combatants were first detained on the battlefield, they did not have any medical records in their possession," the statement continued. "The detainees had a wide range of pre-existing health issues including battlefield injuries."  The Pentagon also said the medical care given detainees was first-rate. Although the Red Cross criticized the lack of confidentiality, it agreed in the report that the medical care was of high quality.  Leonard S. Rubenstein, the executive director of Physicians for Human Rights, was asked to comment on the account of the Red Cross report, and said, "The use of medical personnel to facilitate abusive interrogations places them in an untenable position and violates international ethical standards."  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Rubenstein added, "We need to know more about these practices, including whether health professionals engaged in calibrating levels of pain inflicted on detainees."  The issue of whether torture at Guantánamo was condoned or encouraged has been a problem before for the Bush administration.  In February 2002, President Bush ordered that the prisoners at Guantánamo be treated "humanely and, to the extent appropriate with military necessity, in a manner consistent with" the Geneva Conventions. That statement masked a roiling legal discussion within the administration as government lawyers wrote a series of memorandums, many of which seemed to justify harsh and coercive treatment.  A month after Mr. Bush's public statement, a team of administration lawyers accepted a view first advocated by the Justice Department that the president had wide powers in authorizing coercive treatment of detainees. The legal team in a memorandum concluded that Mr. Bush was not bound by either the international Convention Against Torture or a federal antitorture statute because he had the authority to protect the nation from terrorism.  That document provides tightly constructed definitions of torture. For example, if an interrogator "knows that severe pain will result from his actions, if causing such harm is not his objective, he lacks the requisite specific intent even though the defendant did not act in good faith," it said. "Instead, a defendant is guilty of torture only if he acts with the express purpose of inflicting severe pain or suffering on a person within his control."  When some administration memorandums about coercive treatment or torture were disclosed, the White House said they were only advisory.  Last month, military guards, intelligence agents and others described in interviews with The Times a range of procedures that they said were highly abusive occurring over a long period, as well as rewards for prisoners who cooperated with interrogators. The people who worked at Camp Delta, the main prison facility, said that one regular procedure was making uncooperative prisoners strip to their underwear, having them sit in a chair while shackled hand and foot to a bolt in the floor, and forcing them to endure strobe lights and loud rock and rap music played through two close loudspeakers, while the air-conditioning was turned up to maximum levels.  Some accounts of techniques at Guantánamo have been easy to dismiss because they seemed so implausible. The most striking of the accusations, which have come mainly from a group of detainees released to their native Britain, has been that the military used prostitutes who made coarse comments and come-ons to taunt some prisoners who are Muslims.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the Red Cross report hints strongly at an explanation of some of those accusations by stating that there were frequent complaints by prisoners in 2003 that some of the female interrogators baited their subjects with sexual overtures.  Gen. Geoffrey Miller, who commanded the detention and intelligence operation at Guantánamo until April, when he took over prison operations in Iraq, said in an interview early this year about general interrogation procedures that the female interrogators had proved to be among the most effective. General Miller's observation matches common wisdom among experienced intelligence officers that women may be effective as interrogators when seen by their subjects as mothers or sisters. Sexual taunting does not, however, comport with what is often referred to as the "mother-sister syndrome."  But the Red Cross report said that complaints about the practice of sexual taunting stopped in the last year. Guantánamo officials have acknowledged that they have improved their techniques and that some earlier methods they tried proved to be ineffective, raising the possibility that the sexual taunting was an experiment that was abandoned.  Correction: December 1, 2004, Wednesday A front-page article yesterday citing a confidential report in which the International Committee of the Red Cross accused the American military of using psychological and sometimes physical coercion on prisoners at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, misstated the rank of Jay W. Hood, commander of the detention facility there. He is a brigadier general, not a general.
With little debate or vetting of Mr. Mitchell and his approach, the C.I.A. that day in 2002 started down a road to interrogation practices that Senator Dianne Feinstein, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, last week called “a stain on our values and our history.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In the months that followed, Mr. Mitchell, a former Air Force explosives expert and trainer, and later his partner, Bruce Jessen, another psychologist and former Air Force officer, designed, led and directed the interrogations and became the prime advocates for what is now widely considered to have been torture. In the process, they made tens of millions of dollars under contracts that their critics within the C.I.A. warned at the time gave them financial incentives to repeatedly use the most brutal techniques.  The C.I.A. has said it hired Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Jessen because their experience with “nonstandard” interrogation was “unparalleled.” But the government’s own experts favored the traditional approach to questioning prisoners. And the Senate report makes clear that the speed with which Mr. Mitchell was brought into the program — less than 24 hours elapsed between the time his name was floated and that first cable — meant there was no time to analyze whether his approach was best.  Former officials involved in the program attribute the speed to one thing: desperation. With the C.I.A. under pressure to obtain information from its prisoners, Mr. Mitchell seemed to have the answer to how to do it.  That eagerness for a new, aggressive approach is reflected elsewhere in the Senate report. One C.I.A. officer said the agency’s best intelligence justifying harsh interrogations came from a “walk-in” source — someone who appeared one day and told the C.I.A. that Allah permitted jihadists to cooperate only if they were threatened. There is no evidence in the report that the C.I.A. ever corroborated those assertions.  In a lengthy interview last week after the C.I.A. released him from an order forbidding his talking about his role in its program, Mr. Mitchell said the speed of his hiring was a surprise even to him. “I never knew how that happened,” he said. “I just got a phone call.”  But, he said, it was not something he sought. “I didn’t knock on the gate and say, ‘Let me torture people,’ ” he said.  Video  Mr. Mitchell added that he disagreed with the conclusions of the Senate report and believes he has been unfairly demonized. His role, he said, was more complicated than has been presented.  Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Jessen had worked as trainers at the Air Force Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) program, which subjected American airmen to the kind of interrogation they might face if captured so they could learn to resist it. Building on that experience, Mr. Mitchell proposed to the C.I.A. a list of so-called enhanced interrogation tactics, including locking people in cramped boxes, shackling them in painful positions, keeping them awake for a week at a time, covering them with insects, and waterboarding, which simulates drowning and which the United States had considered torture.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Though the earliest mention of these tactics in the Senate report is July 2002, Justice Department documents released years ago show that C.I.A. officials began discussing them within days of the April 1 meeting when Mr. Mitchell was brought aboard. John Rizzo, the agency’s top lawyer at the time, also placed those discussions in April in his memoir “Company Man.” He described some of the tactics as “sadistic and terrifying” but left it to Justice Department lawyers to decide whether they were legal. They ultimately decided they were.  Shortly after the April 1 meeting, the C.I.A. dispatched Mr. Mitchell to Thailand, where he was to consult on the “psychological aspects” of the interrogation, according to a C.I.A. cable cited in the report. Mr. Mitchell’s original contract with the agency had been to study Al Qaeda’s strategies for resisting interrogation. Later, Mr. Mitchell personally waterboarded Abu Zubaydah in Thailand. But Mr. Mitchell said that at first, his job was to observe Abu Zubaydah’s interrogation and assess whether he was using the Qaeda techniques.  “I was making recommendations to a team who were doing the interrogation,” he said. “But there was intense pressure for results. There was a tremendous amount of pressure not to let other Americans die.”  That summer, as Justice Department lawyers and the White House finalized the legal memos justifying the interrogations, Mr. Mitchell said he gave a presentation outlining an aggressive approach. He disputes the notion that he pushed the agency down a road it did not want to go. “It was clear to me from walking the halls that they were going to use coercive interrogations,” he said. “It was clear that was the direction they were going.”  The SERE techniques, he said, were an attempt to standardize the interrogation process and bolster it with research. “I said, if you are going to use coercive techniques, then don’t let people just freelance,” Mr. Mitchell recalled. “Use something that people have a track record with.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  There was broad consensus among behavioral scientists, however, that torture did not work — subjects became so eager to stop the pain that they did not provide accurate information. And Mr. Mitchell was proposing to take techniques employed in simulations and use them for actual interrogations.  The Senate report indicates that at least some information suggesting that SERE methods were ineffective as interrogation tactics was never shared with the Justice Department. Nevertheless, the department authorized the techniques, and the C.I.A. asked Mr. Mitchell to use them.  “After a lot of soul searching, I agreed to do it,” Mr. Mitchell said. “But I knew that at that moment, my life as I knew it was over. I went through my ethical obligations, and decided for me, the least worst choice was to help save American lives. It felt like something was going to happen at any minute. I felt like you had to do something.”  Mr. Mitchell suggested that the C.I.A. also hire Mr. Jessen, a friend and former colleague. In the Air Force, Mr. Jessen had helped screen the instructors who posed as interrogators. Occasionally, he played the interrogator himself, and was once called out by colleagues for being too aggressive. Mr. Jessen did not respond to repeated interview requests.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Thailand, only Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Jessen were allowed to use the new tactics. For nearly a month, they interrogated Abu Zubaydah, at one point waterboarding him until he lost consciousness. Some C.I.A. officials said they were repulsed by the brutal methods, according to the Senate report, and cables showed that some wanted out of the program. Some officials, in fact, grew to resent the contractors, complaining that they refused to listen to alternatives, the report says. “I would sometimes feel it,” Mr. Mitchell said. “It was nothing ever said to me, but I could feel it sometimes.”  Yet the Senate report shows that Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Jessen prevailed, backed by allies at C.I.A. headquarters, including on the agency’s Bin Laden team and at the Counterterrorism Center, who believed that Abu Zubaydah — and later others — were holding back information. It eventually became difficult to distinguish between the C.I.A. and Mitchell and Jessen Associates, the Spokane, Wash.-based company they formed, according to the Senate report.  In 2005, the C.I.A. awarded the company a contract to provide interrogation services. Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Jessen hired psychologists, interrogators and security personnel as the program spread to secret prisons in Afghanistan, Romania, Poland and Lithuania.  By 2006, contractors made up 73 percent of the people at the C.I.A.’s Renditions and Detention Group, the office in charge of interrogations. The majority were from Mitchell and Jessen Associates, according to the report. Mr. Mitchell said the C.I.A. made it clear that they wanted him to form the company as a way to combat the high turnover. “They wanted to have people who had retired who knew the skills,” he said. In one example, the chief of the C.I.A. division that supervised the interrogation program became the firm’s chief operating officer when he retired.  Mitchell and Jessen Associates had one central purpose, and when President Obama shut down the interrogation program in 2009, it was over. “The company didn’t last after they shut down the program,” Mr. Mitchell said.  The C.I.A. terminated the contract after paying the company $81 million of a contract that could have been worth twice that much. That does not include the money Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Jessen made before 2005, when the C.I.A. paid them a daily rate.  Both men are now retired — Mr. Mitchell to Florida and Mr. Jessen to Spokane, Wash. But both have faced continuing problems from their role in the torture program, and the C.I.A. is obligated to keep paying the legal expenses of Mitchell and Jessen Associates through 2021.  Even before the Senate report, both had been publicly linked to the C.I.A.’s interrogation program, and as a result their role has been a source of controversy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In 2010, the Texas State Board of Psychologists considered a complaint filed against Mr. Mitchell by critics who wanted his license to practice psychology revoked. The complaint was unsuccessful.  In 2012, Mr. Jessen was selected to be a bishop in the Mormon Church in Spokane, but he was forced to step down “due to concerns expressed about his past work related to interrogation techniques,” a spokesman for the Mormon Church said.  Mr. Mitchell said he disagreed with the Senate committee’s conclusions, although he said he was “fascinated” by the report because it has revealed things to him that he did not know. “I was just a cog in the machine, ” he said.  Above all, he disputes that he was in control of the interrogation program. “The idea that I was managing things and running things is not true,” he said.  But, he added, “it would be a lie to say I didn’t have influence.”
“In stark terms I explained to him what this would look like some day and what it would mean for the president and the government,” Mr. Comey wrote in a May 31, 2005, e-mail message to his chief of staff, Chuck Rosenberg. He feared that a case could be made “that some of this stuff was simply awful.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The e-mail messages are now in the hands of investigators at the department’s Office of Professional Responsibility, which is preparing a report expected to be released this summer on the Bush administration lawyers who approved waterboarding and other harsh methods. The inquiry, under way for nearly five years, will be the Justice Department’s fullest public account of its role in the interrogation program, which President Obama has ended.  In years of bitter public debate, the department has sometimes seemed like a black-and-white moral battleground over torture. The main authors of memorandums authorizing the methods — John C. Yoo, Jay S. Bybee and Steven G. Bradbury — have been widely pilloried as facilitators of torture.  Photo  Others, including Mr. Comey, Jack Goldsmith and Daniel Levin, have largely escaped criticism because they raised questions about interrogation and the law.  But a closer examination shows a more subtle picture. None of the Justice Department lawyers who reviewed the interrogation question argued that the methods were clearly illegal.  For example:  ¶Mr. Goldsmith, now a Harvard law professor, unnerved the C.I.A. in June 2004 by withdrawing a 2002 memorandum written by Mr. Yoo that said only pain equal to that produced by organ failure or death qualified as torture.  In addition, in a previously undisclosed letter to the agency, Mr. Goldsmith put a temporary halt to waterboarding. But he left intact a secret companion memorandum from 2002 that actually authorized the harsh methods, leaving the C.I.A. free to use all its methods except waterboarding, including wall-slamming, face-slapping, stress positions and more.  ¶Mr. Levin, now in private practice, won public praise with a 2004 memorandum that opened by declaring “torture is abhorrent.” But he also wrote a letter to the C.I.A that specifically approved waterboarding in August 2004, and he drafted much of Mr. Bradbury’s lengthy May 2005 opinion authorizing the 13 methods.  ¶Mr. Comey, who had forced a 2004 showdown with White House officials over the National Security Agency’s surveillance program, concurred in that Bradbury opinion. His objections focused on a second legal opinion that authorized combinations of the methods. He expressed “grave reservations” and asked for a week to revise the memorandum, warning Mr. Gonzales that “it would come back to haunt him and the department,” Mr. Comey said in a 2005 e-mail message to Mr. Rosenberg.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Justice Department lawyers involved in the opinions felt torn between what was legal and what was advisable, Mr. Levin said. “Obviously you can only do that which is legal,” he said in a recent interview. “But that does not mean you should automatically do something simply because it is legal.”  Photo  The e-mail messages and documents provide new details about a critical year in the interrogation saga, beginning in mid-2004. The C.I.A. inspector general had questioned the legality and effectiveness of the harsh methods, prompting a review of the program. Under intense White House pressure, the Justice Department lawyers in May 2005 approved a series of opinions that reauthorized the harshest practices.  The lawyers had to interpret a 1994 antitorture law written largely with despotic foreign regimes in mind, but used starting in 2002, in effect, as a set of guidelines for American interrogators. The law defined torture as treatment “specifically intended to inflict severe physical or mental pain or suffering.” By that standard, a succession of Justice Department lawyers concluded that the C.I.A.’s methods did not constitute torture.  The only issues that provoked debate were waterboarding, which Mr. Goldsmith questioned, and some combinations of multiple techniques, which Mr. Comey resisted.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Some outside experts agree that the language of the 1994 law is strikingly narrow. “There’s no doubt whatsoever that a great deal of coercive treatment that most people would call torture is not prohibited by the federal antitorture statute,” said Benjamin Wittes, a Brookings Institution scholar who has studied interrogation policy.  But many believe that even under that law, the Justice Department should have recognized that waterboarding, at least, was torture. To argue otherwise, said Brian Z. Tamanaha, a St. John’s University law professor who has studied the interrogation memorandums, required “extraordinary contortions in language and legal analysis.”  Waterboarding, the near-drowning method that Mr. Obama has described as torture, was used on three operatives for Al Qaeda in 2002 and 2003. The C.I.A. never used the technique after it was reauthorized in 2005.  C.I.A. officials had been nervous about the legality of their proposed methods from the start in 2002. They had asked Michael Chertoff, then head of the Justice Department’s criminal division, to grant interrogators immunity in advance from prosecution for torture. Mr. Chertoff refused, but neither did he warn the agency against the methods it was proposing.  Photo  The agency’s worst fears about the potential liability of its officers returned with a vengeance in 2004, after the sharp criticism from the agency’s inspector general and Mr. Goldsmith’s withdrawal of the first torture memorandum. C.I.A. officials demanded a comprehensive legal review.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Goldsmith resigned in July 2004, and his successor as acting head of the Office of Legal Counsel, Mr. Levin, quickly set to work on the review, assisted by his top deputy, Mr. Bradbury.  On July 22, 2004, the Justice Department offered the C.I.A. interim assurance that it could use all methods except waterboarding, which Mr. Goldsmith had questioned. On Aug. 6, Mr. Levin issued another interim letter reauthorizing waterboarding, as long as rules were followed.  But in February 2005, when Mr. Levin moved to a job as legal adviser to the National Security Council, the new interrogation opinions had not been approved by all necessary officials. The day before his departure, Mr. Levin stopped by and apologized to Mr. Bradbury for leaving it to him to sign the volatile documents.  By April 2005, the opinions were in final form, and Mr. Comey, who had set his own resignation for August, concurred in the 46-page opinion affirming the legality of the 13 techniques. But he told Mr. Gonzales that he strongly objected to Mr. Bradbury’s second opinion, allowing multiple techniques to be used in a single interrogation session.  Mr. Gonzales told him that he was “under great pressure” from Vice President Dick Cheney to complete both memorandums and that President George W. Bush had asked about them, Mr. Comey recounted in one of the 2005 e-mail messages.  Later, after reading a revised draft of the second opinion, Mr. Comey added that “my concerns were not allayed, only heightened.” He said he wanted more time to fix the memorandum, but Mr. Gonzales’s chief of staff, Theodore Ullyot, told him the White House would not wait.  Mr. Comey wanted an analysis centered on actual interrogations in an effort to limit the type and combination of techniques that would be permissible, according to someone familiar with his thinking.  “I told him the people who were applying pressure now would not be there when the [expletive] hit the fan,” Mr. Comey wrote in another e-mail message. “It would be Alberto Gonzales in the bull’s-eye. I told him it was my job to protect the department and the A.G. and that I could not agree to this because it was wrong. I told him it could be made right in a week, which was a blink of an eye, and that nobody would understand at a hearing three years from now why we didn’t take that week.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Pentagon said on Monday that it had sent 15 Guantánamo detainees to the United Arab Emirates in the largest single transfer of the Obama administration. The move eliminated a fifth of the wartime prison’s remaining population, which dropped to 61.  While it appears increasingly unlikely that President Obama will succeed in closing the prison before he leaves office in January, the transfer brought him significantly closer to another goal: getting out every detainee who has been approved for transfer. Some have been stranded on that list for years because they could not be repatriated.  The detainees sent to the United Arab Emirates included 12 Yemenis and three Afghans. The United States had held each of them without trial for about 14 years. Their departure reduced the list of prisoners approved for transfer to 20 men, although a parole-like review board occasionally adds new names to it.  “The United States is grateful to the government of the United Arab Emirates for its continued assistance in closing the detention facility at Guantánamo Bay,” Lee Wolosky, the State Department special envoy who negotiates such transfers, said in a statement.  The Obama administration has made a sustained diplomatic push to persuade Persian Gulf states to resettle detainees from troubled countries like Yemen. American security officials see them as attractive places to send such detainees both because they share the same language and culture, and because they have security agencies with the capacity to monitor them.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Oman was the first gulf country to provide such help, agreeing to resettle 10 low-level detainees in two batches in early and mid-2015. At a meeting in May 2015 at Camp David with leaders or representatives from the six Gulf Cooperation Council countries, Mr. Obama sought to leverage that deal by urging others to help out, too, officials said.  The United Arab Emirates resettled five Yemenis last November. It put them into a modified version of a custodial rehabilitation program it had developed for its own citizens who had been drawn into Islamist extremism, according to officials familiar with the transfer.  In January, Oman resettled another group of 10. And in April, Saudi Arabia resettled nine.  Qatar has taken on a different headache: In 2014, it resettled five high-level Taliban prisoners whom the administration exchanged for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl. Those former prisoners continue to live there under restrictive conditions.  The transfers announced Monday were approved by Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter. Under restrictions imposed by Congress, he must tell lawmakers at least 30 days before any transfer that he has determined that security conditions in the receiving country are adequate.  One of the detainees in Monday’s transfer, an Afghan named Obaydullah, was arrested in 2002 and accused of hiding anti-tank mines for an insurgent cell. Late in the Bush administration, he was charged in the military commissions system with providing material support for terrorism, although the charge was later withdrawn for technical reasons.  His defense team later visited Afghanistan and reinvestigated his case, developing what it said in 2012 was evidence that the accusations against him were mistaken, although the team failed to persuade a court to order his release. Last spring, however, the review board decided that he should be sent to a country with a strong reintegration program and monitoring capacity.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “In making this determination, the board noted that the detainee has not expressed any intent to re-engage in terrorist activities, has not espoused any anti-U.S. sentiment that would indicate he views the U.S. as his enemy, that neither the detainee nor his family have any ties to extremists outside of Guantánamo, and that the detainee has been mostly compliant while at Guantánamo,” the review board explained in a report.  Maj. Derek A. Poteet of the Marines, a military lawyer who helped represent Mr. Obaydullah, said he visited his client at the prison about three weeks ago. Mr. Obaydullah had already heard a rumor that the United Arab Emirates had agreed to resettle him, he said.  “He had hope on his face and relief when I was able to confirm that hope,” Major Poteet said. “My paralegal and I were in there, and he reassured us that ‘I want to live a life of peace with my family, and I want nothing to do with politics.’”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  When Mr. Obama took office in 2009, 242 detainees remained at Guantánamo. He has proposed closing it by bringing several dozen detainees who are not approved for transfer to a replacement prison on domestic soil.  But Congress has blocked that plan, and some Republican lawmakers have proposed shutting down transfers of lower-level detainees to other countries, too.  “The pre-eminent responsibility of the federal government is to keep the American people safe, yet the Obama administration’s misguided commitment to releasing detainees in order to eventually close Guantánamo unacceptably gambles with our nation’s safety,” Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, said last week.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Moroccan government is violating the diplomatic assurances it provided to the State Department that it would swiftly release, and not prosecute, a former Guantánamo Bay detainee whom the United States recently repatriated to Morocco, according to a lawyer for the prisoner.  The credibility of diplomatic assurances about how prisoners will be treated is a key to the Obama administration’s ability to transfer lower-level detainees out of the prison, which President Obama wants to close before he leaves office in 2017.  The lawyer, Cori Crider, of the international human rights group Reprieve, said on Thursday that before the detainee, Yunis Abdurrahman Shokuri, was transferred to Morocco on Sept. 16, State Department officials had conveyed to Reprieve that the Moroccan government had promised to release him within 72 hours and did not intend to charge him with a crime.  But Mr. Shokuri remains in custody, and a Moroccan prosecutor has referred him to an investigating judge to consider possible charges, she said. At a hearing last week, the judge declined to release him, setting another hearing Oct. 22 to decide whether to proceed with a prosecution over his suspected conduct before his capture in Afghanistan in 2001.  “We are extremely concerned that the government of Morocco’s explicit promises about the way it would treat Yunis have not yet been honored,” said Ms. Crider, who is helping to represent him. She urged the United States to “escalate” discussions with Morocco “to the highest level.”  A spokeswoman at the Moroccan Embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Obama administration officials declined to comment specifically on Mr. Shokuri’s case, but suggested that they were talking to the Moroccan government.  “We remain in close contact with receiving governments following the transfer of detainees from Guantánamo, and this ongoing dialogue covers a range of issues, including security and humane treatment,” said Ian Moss, a State Department spokesman.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A leaked military dossier on Mr. Shokuri, 47, said that in 1999, he helped found an Islamist group for Moroccans that was not a part of Al Qaeda or the Taliban but had ties to them. Reprieve has denied that.  Mr. Shokuri was captured by Pakistani forces near the Afghanistan border in December 2001. The United States held him at Guantánamo in law-of-war detention for more than 13 years but did not charge him with a crime. In 2009, a six-agency task force unanimously recommended transferring him if security conditions could be met in the receiving country.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Lawyers for detainees usually cannot speak about diplomatic assurances related to the transfers of their clients because of a court-imposed protective order, unless the executive branch grants permission.  Reprieve made a sealed filing last week apparently related to discussing diplomatic assurances in public and in Moroccan court. Late Wednesday night, the Justice Department made its own sealed filing in response. On Thursday, Reprieve said it was now permitted to say the following, using an alternate spelling of its client’s name:  “On March 12, 2015, the State Department indicated to Reprieve staff at a meeting that their officials had received the following specific assurances about Mr. Chekkouri: that he would not be detained in Morocco for longer than 72 hours; that Morocco had pledged that it had no intention to lodge charges against Petitioner; and that Morocco had heard and accepted the stated view of the State Department that there was no cause to charge Petitioner with an offense.”  In public filings, Reprieve is also asking the court to force the government to swiftly declassify certain information about Mr. Shokuri so they can introduce it in Moroccan court. The Justice Department separately made a public filing late Wednesday urging the judge not to issue such an order.  The dispute arose as the Republican-controlled Congress this week unveiled the annual National Defense Authorization Act, which contains restrictions on transferring Guantánamo detainees, after the House and Senate armed services committees finished reconciling rival versions.  Mr. Obama has threatened to veto that legislation, partly over a spending dispute and partly over the transfer restrictions, which he had asked Congress to lift.  Instead, the bill maintains a ban on bringing detainees into the United States for any purpose. The administration’s plan for closing the Guantánamo prison involves bringing those detainees who are not recommended for transfer — there are 61 — to another military prison in the United States.  Also, the bill would not just maintain but heighten restrictions on when the executive branch may repatriate or resettle the lower-level detainees who are recommended for transfer. There are 53 such detainees.  The administration circulated a statement denouncing the bill’s transfer restriction provisions as “unwise and unnecessary.”
Exit polls for 2010 will be available when all polls close in this race.  Methodology  Data for 2016 were collected by Edison Research for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, The Associated Press, CBSNews, CNN, Fox News and NBC News. The voter survey is based on questionnaires completed by 24,537 voters leaving 350 voting places throughout the United States on Election Day including 4,398 telephone interviews with early and absentee voters.  In 2012, 2008 and 2004, the exit poll was conducted by Edison/Mitofsky; in 1996 and 2000 by Voter News Services; in 1992 by Voter Research and Surveys; and in earlier years by The New York Times and CBS News.  Direct comparisons from year to year should factor in differences in how questions were asked. Race and sex were determined by interviewers in surveys before 1984. Independent or third-party candidates are not shown.  Population scaling is representative of the number of voters in each category.  *Change is shown in percentage points. When comparable data are available, this measure combines the change in Republican support and the change in Democratic support from the previous election.
Video  SAN JOSE, Calif. — Donald J. Trump unleashed an attack on Hillary Clinton on Thursday in response to her speech earlier in the day criticizing his foreign policy positions.  Speaking at a campaign rally here, he began by calling her speech “pathetic,” dismissing it as a stunt and saying, “It had nothing to do with foreign policy.”  Outside the event, protesters, some brandishing Mexican flags, clashed violently with Mr. Trump’s supporters.  Videos taken at the scene showed a number of physical confrontations. In one, a supporter wearing a football jersey emblazoned with Mr. Trump’s name was pelted with eggs. Another showed an unsuspecting man being surrounded by protesters and punched in the face.  In a third video, a man who had emerged from the event holding a Trump sign was struck in the head and began to bleed.  The San Jose Police Department said in a brief statement that it had made “a few arrests” after the rally and that one police officer had been assaulted. It said more details would be provided on Friday.  In his speech, Mr. Trump continued his attack on Mrs. Clinton, accusing her of secretly hating President Obama.  “Remember, Hillary Clinton used to hate Obama,” Mr. Trump said. “She used to hate him. The old Clinton hated him.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He mocked Mrs. Clinton and her husband, saying they bowed to the president’s whims: “Yes, sir, Mr. President, sir. What would you like? What would you like me to say, sir?” The crowd roared.  He argued that Mrs. Clinton was supportive of Mr. Obama only because of the investigation into her private email server.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Anything Obama wants, she’s going forward with,” Mr. Trump said. “Because you know why? She doesn’t want to go to jail. That’s why.”  That line of attack closely aligns with the writing of Ed Klein, the conservative author whose books on Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama have been dismissed by critics as including fabricated accounts of events. Mr. Trump recently met with Mr. Klein.  Though he offered some lighthearted jokes about the crowd size being affected by the N.B.A. finals nearby, Mr. Trump seemed to grow angrier during the speech and repeatedly went after Mrs. Clinton.  He did not offer many direct rebukes of Mrs. Clinton’s speech, sticking mainly to mocking the candidate and focusing on her emails, but he criticized her claim that Russia and China were “jealous” of the United States’ relationships with its allies.  “They’re not jealous; they think we’re stupid,” Mr. Trump said.  He also accused Mrs. Clinton of lying when she said he would allow Japan to have nuclear weapons; in an interview this year, though, he said he was open to it.  And he once again proclaimed that he was against the Iraq invasion, although audio from 2002 has surfaced of Mr. Trump supporting the invasion.  “Hillary said, ‘Oh, Donald Trump, his finger on the button,’” Mr. Trump said. “I’m the one who didn’t want to go in Iraq, folks.”  He promised to make Mrs. Clinton’s email server an issue on the campaign trail, repeatedly calling her “guilty as hell” and hinting that under a President Trump, “the attorney general is going to take a very good look” at the issue.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump was active on Twitter after the event but did not comment on the violence.
The $916 million loss certainly could have eliminated any federal income taxes Mr. Trump otherwise would have owed on the $50,000 to $100,000 he was paid for each episode of “The Apprentice,” or the roughly $45 million he was paid between 1995 and 2009 when he was chairman or chief executive of the publicly traded company he created to assume ownership of his troubled Atlantic City casinos. Ordinary investors in the new company, meanwhile, saw the value of their shares plunge to 17 cents from $35.50, while scores of contractors went unpaid for work on Mr. Trump’s casinos and casino bondholders received pennies on the dollar.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “He has a vast benefit from his destruction” in the early 1990s, said one of the experts, Joel Rosenfeld, an assistant professor at New York University’s Schack Institute of Real Estate. Mr. Rosenfeld offered this description of what he would advise a client who came to him with a tax return like Mr. Trump’s: “Do you realize you can create $916 million in income without paying a nickel in taxes?”  Mr. Trump declined to comment on the documents. Instead, the campaign released a statement that neither challenged nor confirmed the $916 million loss.  “Mr. Trump is a highly-skilled businessman who has a fiduciary responsibility to his business, his family and his employees to pay no more tax than legally required,” the statement said. “That being said, Mr. Trump has paid hundreds of millions of dollars in property taxes, sales and excise taxes, real estate taxes, city taxes, state taxes, employee taxes and federal taxes.”  The statement continued, “Mr. Trump knows the tax code far better than anyone who has ever run for President and he is the only one that knows how to fix it.”  Separately, a lawyer for Mr. Trump, Marc E. Kasowitz, emailed a letter to The Times arguing that publication of the records is illegal because Mr. Trump has not authorized the disclosure of any of his tax returns. Mr. Kasowitz threatened “prompt initiation of appropriate legal action.”  Mr. Trump’s refusal to make his tax returns public — breaking with decades of tradition in presidential contests — has emerged as a central issue in the campaign, with a majority of voters saying he should release them. Mr. Trump has declined to do so, and has said he is being audited by the Internal Revenue Service.  At last Monday’s presidential debate, when Hillary Clinton suggested Mr. Trump was refusing to release his tax returns so voters would not know “he’s paid nothing in federal taxes,” and when she also pointed out that Mr. Trump had once revealed to casino regulators that he paid no federal income taxes in the late 1970s, Mr. Trump retorted, “That makes me smart.”  Video  The tax experts consulted by The Times said nothing in the 1995 documents suggested any wrongdoing by Mr. Trump, even if the extraordinary size of the loss he declared would have probably attracted extra scrutiny from I.R.S. examiners. “The I.R.S., when they see a negative $916 million, that has to pop out,” Mr. Rosenfeld said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The documents examined by The Times represent a small fraction of the voluminous tax returns Mr. Trump would have filed in 1995.  The documents consisted of three pages from what appeared to be Mr. Trump’s 1995 tax returns. The pages were mailed last month to Susanne Craig, a reporter at The Times who has written about Mr. Trump’s finances. The documents were the first page of a New York State resident income tax return, the first page of a New Jersey nonresident tax return and the first page of a Connecticut nonresident tax return. Each page bore the names and Social Security numbers of Mr. Trump and Marla Maples, his wife at the time. Only the New Jersey form had what appeared to be their signatures.  The three documents arrived by mail at The Times with a postmark indicating they had been sent from New York City. The return address claimed the envelope had been sent from Trump Tower.  On Wednesday, The Times presented the tax documents to Jack Mitnick, a lawyer and certified public accountant who handled Mr. Trump’s tax matters for more than 30 years, until 1996. Mr. Mitnick was listed as the preparer on the New Jersey tax form.  Mr. Mitnick, 80, now semiretired and living in Florida, said that while he no longer had access to Mr. Trump’s original returns, the documents appeared to be authentic copies of portions of Mr. Trump’s 1995 tax returns. Mr. Mitnick said the signature on the tax preparer line of the New Jersey tax form was his, and he readily explained an obvious anomaly in the way especially large numbers appeared on the New York tax document.  A flaw in the tax software program he used at the time prevented him from being able to print a nine-figure loss on Mr. Trump’s New York return, he said. So, for example, the loss of “-915,729,293” on Line 18 of the return printed out as “5,729,293.” As a result, Mr. Mitnick recalled, he had to use his typewriter to manually add the “-91,” thus explaining why the first two digits appeared to be in a different font and were slightly misaligned from the following seven digits.  “This is legit,” he said, stabbing a finger into the document.  Because the documents sent to The Times did not include any pages from Mr. Trump’s 1995 federal tax return, it is impossible to determine how much he may have donated to charity that year. The state documents do show, though, that Mr. Trump declined the opportunity to contribute to the New Jersey Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial Fund, the New Jersey Wildlife Conservation Fund or the Children’s Trust Fund. He also declined to contribute $1 toward public financing of New Jersey’s elections for governor.  The tax documents also do not shed any light on Mr. Trump’s claimed net worth of about $2 billion at that time. This is because the complex calculations of business deductions that produced a tax loss of $916 million are a separate matter from how Mr. Trump valued his assets, the tax experts said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Nor does the $916 million loss suggest that Mr. Trump was insolvent or effectively bankrupt in 1995. The cash flow generated by his various businesses that year was more than enough to service his various debts.  But fragmentary as they are, the documents nonetheless provide new insight into Mr. Trump’s finances, a subject of intense scrutiny given Mr. Trump’s emphasis on his business record during the presidential campaign.  Breaking News Alerts Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The documents show, for example, that while Mr. Trump reported $7.4 million in interest income in 1995, he made only $6,108 in wages, salaries and tips. They also suggest Mr. Trump took full advantage of generous tax loopholes specifically available to commercial real estate developers to claim a $15.8 million loss in 1995 on his real estate holdings and partnerships.  But the most important revelation from the 1995 tax documents is just how much Mr. Trump may have benefited from a tax provision that is particularly prized by America’s dynastic families, which, like the Trumps, hold their wealth inside byzantine networks of partnerships, limited liability companies and S corporations.  The provision, known as net operating loss, or N.O.L., allows a dizzying array of deductions, business expenses, real estate depreciation, losses from the sale of business assets and even operating losses to flow from the balance sheets of those partnerships, limited liability companies and S corporations onto the personal tax returns of men like Mr. Trump. In turn, those losses can be used to cancel out an equivalent amount of taxable income from, say, book royalties or branding deals.  Better still, if the losses are big enough, they can cancel out taxable income earned in other years. Under I.R.S. rules in 1995, net operating losses could be used to wipe out taxable income earned in the three years before and the 15 years after the loss. (The effect of net operating losses on state income taxes varies, depending on each state’s tax regime.)  The tax experts consulted by The Times said the $916 million net operating loss declared by Mr. Trump in 1995 almost certainly included large net operating losses carried forward from the early 1990s, when most of Mr. Trump’s key holdings were hemorrhaging money. Indeed, by 1990, his entire business empire was on the verge of collapse. In a few short years, he had amassed $3.4 billion in debt — personally guaranteeing $832 million of it — to assemble a portfolio that included three casinos and a hotel in Atlantic City, the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan, an airline and a huge yacht.  Reports that year by New Jersey casino regulators gave glimpses of the balance sheet carnage. The Trump Taj Mahal casino reported a $25.5 million net loss during its first six months of 1990; the Trump’s Castle casino lost $43.5 million for the year. His airline, Trump Shuttle, lost $34.5 million during just the first six months of that year.  “Simply put, the organization is in dire financial straits,” the casino regulators concluded.  Photo  Reports by New Jersey’s casino regulators strongly suggested that Mr. Trump had claimed large net operating losses on his taxes in the early 1990s. Their reports, for example, revealed that Mr. Trump had carried forward net operating losses in both 1991 and 1993. What’s more, the reports said the losses he claimed were large enough to virtually cancel out any taxes he might owe on the millions of dollars of debt that was being forgiven by his creditors. (The I.R.S. considers forgiven debt to be taxable income.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But crucially, the casino regulators redacted the precise size of the net operating losses in the public versions of their reports. Two former New Jersey officials, who were privy to the unredacted documents, could not recall the precise size of the numbers, but said they were substantial.  Politico, which previously reported that Mr. Trump most likely paid no income taxes in 1991 and 1993 based on the casino commission’s description of his net operating losses, asked Mr. Trump to comment. “Welcome to the real estate business,” he replied in an email.  Now, thanks to Mr. Trump’s 1995 tax records, the degree to which he spun all those years of red ink into tax write-off gold may finally be apparent.  Mr. Mitnick, the lawyer and accountant, was the person Mr. Trump leaned on most to do the spinning. Mr. Mitnick worked for a small Long Island accounting firm that specialized in handling tax issues for wealthy New York real estate families. He had long handled tax matters for Mr. Trump’s father, Fred C. Trump, and he said he began doing Donald Trump’s taxes after Mr. Trump turned 18.  In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Mitnick said he could not divulge details of Mr. Trump’s finances without Mr. Trump’s consent. But he did talk about Mr. Trump’s approaches to taxes, and he contrasted Fred Trump’s attention to detail with what he described as Mr. Trump’s brash and undisciplined style. He recalled, for example, that when Donald and Ivana Trump came in each year to sign their tax forms, it was almost always Ivana who asked more questions.  Photo  But if Mr. Trump lacked a sophisticated understanding of the tax code, and if he rarely showed any interest in the details behind various tax strategies, Mr. Mitnick said he clearly grasped the critical role taxes would play in helping him build wealth. “He knew we could use the tax code to protect him,” Mr. Mitnick said.  According to Mr. Mitnick, Mr. Trump’s use of net operating losses was no different from that of his other wealthy clients. “This may have had a couple extra digits compared to someone else’s operation, but they all benefited in the same way,” he said, pointing to the $916 million loss on Mr. Trump’s tax returns.  In “The Art of the Deal,” his 1987 best-selling book, Mr. Trump referred to Mr. Mitnick as “my accountant” — although he misspelled his name. Mr. Trump described consulting with Mr. Mitnick on the tax implications of deals he was contemplating and seeking his advice on how new federal tax regulations might affect real estate write-offs.  Mr. Mitnick, though, said there were times when even he, for all his years helping wealthy New Yorkers navigate the tax code, found it difficult to face the incongruity of his work for Mr. Trump. He felt keenly aware that Mr. Trump was living a life of unimaginable luxury thanks in part to Mr. Mitnick’s ability to relieve him of the burden of paying taxes like everyone else.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Here the guy was building incredible net worth and not paying tax on it,” he said.
NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
One of the conservatives, Representative Dana Rohrabacher of California, attacked the Republicans stepping away from Mr. Trump as “cowards,” three lawmakers said. Another, Representative Trent Franks of Arizona, said, using graphic language to describe abortion, that allowing Mrs. Clinton into the White House would end with fetuses being destroyed “limb from limb.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Trying to quiet the uproar, Mr. Ryan interjected after about 45 minutes to assure members that he was not withdrawing his endorsement of Mr. Trump, but rather doing what he felt was in the best interests of the House.  For five months, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Trump have alternated between friction and courtship, eventually forging an uneasy working relationship only to see it collapse now, in the final weeks of the race.  AshLee Strong, a spokeswoman for Mr. Ryan, confirmed that his sole priority for the remainder of the election would be defending congressional Republicans. “The speaker is going to spend the next month focused entirely on protecting our congressional majorities,” she said.  Video  Mr. Trump did not repeat his Twitter jab at Mr. Ryan at a campaign event in Pennsylvania Monday afternoon, offering instead a red-meat diatribe unlikely to appeal beyond his dedicated base. He repeated his call from Sunday night’s debate for a special prosecutor to pursue Mrs. Clinton, called her “the devil” and warned that her election would lead to “the destruction of our country.”  A buoyant Mrs. Clinton seemed to revel in her growing advantage over Mr. Trump during a speech in Detroit on Monday afternoon. Mr. Trump, she said, had spent their debate “attacking when he should have been apologizing.”  While Mrs. Clinton made no direct reference to the fissures appearing among Republicans, her campaign tried to exploit the moment, releasing several television ads featuring voters who describe themselves as Republicans but plan to vote for Mrs. Clinton.  Jennifer Palmieri, Mrs. Clinton’s communications director, expressed little sympathy for Republicans now fleeing Mr. Trump.  “There was a time when they could have spoken out against him,” Ms. Palmieri said of party leaders like Mr. Ryan. “That time was this summer. Obviously, it is too late now.”  The consequences for both men are enormous. Mr. Ryan and other Republican leaders fear that Mr. Trump’s flagging campaign will imperil their majorities in the House and Senate, and Mr. Trump can ill afford more prominent rejections when he is trying to rally reluctant Republican voters behind him.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s candidacy was already in dire condition before Mr. Ryan’s announcement. A poll published Monday by NBC News and The Wall Street Journal found him trailing Mrs. Clinton by a wide margin, drawing less than 40 percent of the vote. The survey was taken before the debate.  And in a sign of how deep divisions now run among Republicans, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, Reince Priebus, held a conference call of his own after Mr. Ryan’s to emphasize his commitment to Mr. Trump. Mr. Priebus told members that the committee was working in “full coordination” with the Trump campaign and planned to direct “a lot” of money to the presidential race.  “Nothing has changed in our support for our nominee,” he said, vowing “an incredible four weeks” until the election.  Mr. Priebus, long a close political ally of Mr. Ryan, made no direct reference to the speaker’s announcement, or to the dozens of governors and members of Congress who have rescinded their support for Mr. Trump.  Photo  Representative Scott Rigell of Virginia, a Republican who has long opposed Mr. Trump, said there was a general sense in the House that more humiliating disclosures about Mr. Trump were likely to come before Nov. 8, Election Day.  “There’s a consensus, even among supporters, that the likelihood of something else breaking in a very embarrassing and negative fashion is certainly better than 50-50,” said Mr. Rigell, who joined the call on Monday. “The conference, members, et cetera, are bracing themselves for another salvo of this.”  Mr. Trump seemed to acknowledge that possibility in Pennsylvania, commenting offhand in his speech that if more recordings were to emerge, he would respond with more personal attacks on Mrs. Clinton and her husband.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s allies had hoped that the debate would halt the exodus of fellow Republicans from his candidacy, and they publicly implored members of the party on Monday to stick with him through Election Day. Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, Mr. Trump’s running mate, punctured speculation that he might withdraw from the race by pronouncing himself “proud to stand with Donald Trump” in a visit to North Carolina.  Kellyanne Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, also offered an ominous warning for Republicans fleeing Mr. Trump. She noted on television that Mr. Ryan had been booed by Trump fans over the weekend in Wisconsin and said she knew of Republican lawmakers who had behaved inappropriately toward young women, and whose criticism of Mr. Trump was therefore hypocritical.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Just as telling as the frustration from outspoken conservatives in the House on Monday was the silence from so many mainstream Republicans in the chamber, who showed little appetite to argue for or with their embattled nominee.  Few anti-Trump voices weighed in on the call with Mr. Ryan. Representative Martha Roby of Alabama, who defected from Mr. Trump on Saturday, said she would contribute significant money to help Republicans hold their House majority. But she also said she would speak with colleagues in private about her decision to withdraw her endorsement in the presidential race.  Representative Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania, a vocal critic of Mr. Trump, asked his colleagues if they were truly confident that there would be no more damaging disclosures. In any case, Mr. Dent argued that the race was effectively over for Mr. Trump.  No new prominent Republicans have withdrawn their endorsements since the debate, but there was a palpable fear throughout the party that Mr. Trump had been damaged beyond repair.  Representative Greg Walden of Oregon, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, urged members on the conference call to take polls in their districts to gauge the effect of Mr. Trump’s political slide.  Photo  Mr. Walden said they should brace for a significant erosion of support for Mr. Trump and acknowledged that the shift could hurt congressional candidates, too. He asked the entire caucus to contribute quickly to the party’s campaign arm, making it clear that they needed to strengthen their defenses across the country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At a briefing for Washington lobbyists later in the day, Mr. Walden acknowledged to donors that Republicans were in uncharted territory and wholly uncertain of what would happen next.  Still, many members were pointed in expressing their dismay to Mr. Ryan, warning him of grave consequences, in November and beyond, if Mr. Trump’s campaign collapses altogether.  Representative Billy Long of Missouri spoke up in Mr. Trump’s defense, citing the danger of losing the Supreme Court if Mrs. Clinton wins.  “Many of us commented that if Hillary picks the next two to four judges, it will change the fabric of our country of 40, 50 years,” Mr. Long said later. “Abortion and the Second Amendment, also, and lots of Supreme Court concerns.”
Sheriff Paul Babeu of Pinal County, Ariz., stepped down as a co-chairman of Mitt Romney’s campaign in the state on Saturday after a newspaper published accusations that he threatened to deport a former boyfriend, who was from Mexico, when the man refused to keep quiet about their relationship.  Mr. Babeu made national headlines for his tough stance on illegal immigration. He endorsed Mr. Romney in October and is running for Congress in Arizona’s Fourth District.  The news of Mr. Babeu’s decision to step down from the Romney campaign was first reported by The Arizona Republic.  On Thursday, The Phoenix New Times reported the allegations of a 34-year-old Mexican man whom it identified only as “Jose.” He said that when he refused to sign an agreement that he would never mention his relationship with Mr. Babeu, which he said lasted for years, the sheriff and his lawyer tried to intimidate him with threats of deportation.  In a press conference on Saturday, Mr. Babeu said that he had had a personal relationship with Jose, but denied that he had threatened to deport him. The accusations, he said, “are absolutely, completely false — except for the issues that refer to me as being gay. Because that’s the truth. I am gay.”  Photo  Even though Mr. Babeu was a minor figure in the Romney campaign, the accusations came at a less than ideal time. With Arizona and Michigan holding primaries at the end of the month, Mr. Romney is struggling to shore up social conservatives’ support and to fend off Rick Santorum, who is surging after winning contests in Colorado, Missouri and Minnesota.  “Sheriff Babeu has stepped down from his volunteer position with the campaign so he can focus on the allegations against him,” Andrea Saul, a campaign spokeswoman, said in an e-mail statement. “We support his decision.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The press conference that Mr. Babeu held on Saturday largely turned into a call to look beyond his sexual orientation.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  He defined himself as an American, and appealed for voters and the public to view him through the lens of his military service and time in law enforcement.  “I want to be judged on my service: 20 years in the military, two deployments — including one in Iraq — a police officer who has responded to thousands of calls for help, and a sheriff who has cut response times while reducing my own budget,” he said in a statement.  Jose also told The Phoenix New Times that Mr. Babeu e-mailed explicit photographs of himself to an anonymous man whom he met on a Web site called Adam4Adam.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Barbara Comstock was an intern for Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts when she realized she might be a Republican. But Ms. Comstock, a freshman member of the House from Virginia’s 10th District, did not simply switch sides; she eventually became one of the Republican Party’s fiercest partisans.  An aide to her immediate predecessor, Frank Wolf, Ms. Comstock was known in the 1990s for investigating members of the Clinton administration as chief counsel for the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee.  Her résumé also includes stints as the top Justice Department spokeswoman and a meticulous opposition researcher. Before her election to Congress, Ms. Comstock, 55, a mother and grandmother, served in the Virginia House of Delegates.  Her interests are decidedly less partisan these days. She talked about the need to encourage technological innovation and empower women in an interview, which has been condensed:  What moved you to run for Congress?  Actually I never intended to run for any office, but Congressman Wolf called me and said, “You need to jump in and do this yourself,” and I couldn’t think of a reason not to. I was just really concerned about the direction of the country; the economy in 2008 was awful. My children were in college or out of school at that point, and I grew really concerned about the world they’re going to be living in.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For five years in the Statehouse it was really great because on the state level, you really can make things work. I passed a lot of tech legislation, worked a lot with my tech community, and I do think a lot of the technology areas are where we’re going to break through a lot of the sort of the right-left divide.  You got your start in politics working in Senator Kennedy’s office.  I was at American University in the Washington semester program, and I was raised a Democrat. I came here and was an intern for Ted Kennedy, and actually — Orrin Hatch always enjoys this story — as I went to the hearings, whether it was the health hearings or judiciary, which they both were on at that time, I realized that I agreed more with the ideas that Orrin Hatch was talking about how we deal with health care, judicial issues. And I was a Reagan Democrat probably initially.  When I came here to Virginia to go to law school at Georgetown, Frank Wolf was my congressman, and I met him fairly early on in the ’80s and really liked him. Congressman Wolf used to always say: “You wake up in the morning, you can read something in the paper and think someone needs to fix that. And you can be that someone.”  What do you think of Hillary Rodham Clinton’s potential candidacy for the presidency?  It’s always good to stay in my lane on that one, and I don’t know what’s going to happen on the other side. It’s a lifetime in an election between now and next year, so it’s always wide open.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Did you do your own opposition research for the past campaign? It was a close race.  In my three state delegate races I knocked on over 10,000 doors each election, so that’s the part that I like, because when you’re actually talking to everybody, door-to-door, you honestly know what their top priorities are. As a representative and a candidate, I think that’s my best role, the best way of doing things, because you get good ideas from people. You kind of cut through the clutter.  What is it like to be a Republican right now, when many of the prominent figures in your party are such divisive figures?  I think there are some people on both sides who are like that, whether it’s Elizabeth Warren or there are others that can carry that same banner on the other side. But I started a young women’s leadership program here. Obviously you want women to be experienced, and in my case, I like the Maggie Thatcher model more in terms of women leaders, but I think we need to get women leaders out there on a lot of fronts. I’ve encouraged women in a lot of different areas to step up and think of themselves in leadership roles because I know in my case, when I was running, Congressman Wolf called me, and actually some other men did — but women, we often don’t say that to ourselves.  What will success look like for your first term?  I think first and foremost that the economy is much more on track. Part of getting the economy on track is having technology work better so that things — whether it’s health care or access for medicine — are working better and costing less. When I was in college, I had to make long-distance phone calls to my husband, who was in Texas, and we spent $200 a month on phone bills. Now I have a device that costs me less than that, that has the power of my computer and search tools and unlimited phone calls, and why shouldn’t your government work more like that?  And having more women leaders involved. Right now I’m the only woman representing Virginia. I’m the first woman in this seat. For the first time we’re over a hundred women in Congress, but there’s only been a little over 300 ever in Congress. I think since there’s 10,000-something members of all time. I didn’t realize the number was that small.
In an especially troublesome year to run as a Republican in a district where one in five residents is Latino, the race for Mr. Coffman’s seat has become one of the most competitive, with Democrats hungrily eyeing it in their Quixotic quest to recapture the House. The fight for Colorado’s Sixth District is one of 16 House races currently up for grabs, according to Larry J. Sabato’s Crystal Ball political newsletter.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The House — a mélange of gerrymandered districts that largely insulate members from political forces like a controversial presidential nominee— is unlikely to turn blue this year. The Democrats would have to pick up at least 30 seats, a long-shot for a party whose leaders did not anticipate Mr. Trump’s rise early enough to recruit stronger candidates, Mr. Wasserman said. Republicans are more likely to see their 247-to-188 majority reduced by about 10 to 15 seats, political forecasters like Mr. Wasserman said.  But Republicans in the hot seats are fleeing Mr. Trump’s undertow. Early this month, Mr. Coffman became the first House Republican to air an ad explicitly distancing himself from his party’s presidential candidate.  “Honestly, I don’t care for him much,” Mr. Coffman said in the spot, which is running in English and Spanish.  Photo  In Colorado, Mr. Trump is 14 percentage points behind Hillary Clinton, according to an NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist poll released Friday.  In keeping with Colorado’s independent streak, about 21 percent said they were not planning to vote for either candidate or were undecided — a group to which Mr. Coffman appealed when he also refused to support Mrs. Clinton.  Mr. Coffman will have to do more than just retain the favor he has gained in his increasingly Democratic district, Mr. Wasserman said, because more Democrats turn out to vote in presidential election years.  And this year he is grappling with another factor: “a very credible and talented opponent,” Mr. Wasserman said.  That opponent, Morgan Carroll, a Democrat who served as president of the State Senate, listened intently on Aug. 6 as a couple of dozen Latino activists and voters enumerated their concerns at her campaign office as they munched on pan dulce, a Latin American pastry, and doughnuts. Grievances included a fractured education system, a flawed criminal justice system and a broken immigration system. She jotted down notes with a purple gel pen, letting her guests steer the conversation but slipping in to offer her position or a brief interpretation of the congressional landscape.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Carroll, who grew up in Colorado and has represented parts of the district in the state legislature since 2005, is a self-described policy nerd, dropping to a whisper as she confesses that. Ms. Carroll has read every bill she has ever voted on, she said, and a few she has not, such as the entire Affordable Care Act, she said — twice.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In the legislature, Ms. Carroll sponsored legislation requiring universal background checks for firearms sales after the 2012 movie theater shooting in Aurora that left 12 dead and scores injured. Her bill became law in 2013.  Mr. Coffman, she said, helped foster the environment that led to Mr. Trump’s nomination.  “He may realize that Trump is politically unpopular,” Ms. Carroll said, “and he may see that he not only needs to distance himself from Donald Trump, but, here’s the kicker: Mike Coffman has to distance himself from Mike Coffman.”  Mr. Coffman’s detractors see him as another pandering politician, willing to do anything to get re-elected. Another of Mr. Coffman’s ads — in which a handful of people of different ages and ethnicities say he is “not like other Republicans” but “one of us” — draws bitter laughter at Ms. Carroll’s campaign office.  “He didn’t find religion until he got redistricted,” said Tim Sandos, a former Denver city councilman who is now the chief executive of the National Hispanic Voter Educational Foundation. “And now all of a sudden he’s ‘one of us.’”  Democrats have tried to tie Mr. Coffman to his party’s often bombastic standard-bearer, with the national campaign committee sinking $10,000 into television ads that ran last week and the progressive advocacy group Americans United for Change targeting Mr. Coffman among other vulnerable Republicans.  But Mr. Coffman is striving to rise above the national political environment. At Denver’s annual Taste of Ethiopia festival this month, he dug into a spread of injera and beef tibs, eating the traditional way — with his hands — while squeezed between Nick Metz, the Aurora police chief, and Geta Asfaw, a prominent Ethiopian immigrant and a businessman who owns a number of McDonald’s franchises.  After making his way through the platter and the crowd, Mr. Coffman accepted flowers and a traditional Ethiopian shirt from the festival’s organizer before an appreciative audience. Mr. Coffman had warmed up the crowd with a few halting words in Amharic and remarks about the importance of one of the largest immigrant communities in the state.  Immediately after the appreciation ceremony for Mr. Coffman, the organizer introduced Ms. Carroll for her own brief remarks — making no mention of the fact that she was running to unseat the apparent guest of honor.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric has troubled Ethiopians, Mr. Asfaw said. (“When you’re negative about one immigrant, you affect the whole immigrant community,” he said.) But many Ethiopian immigrants remember that Mr. Coffman went to their churches to grieve with them when the Islamic State beheaded a number of Ethiopians in Libya last year.  “If more and more Republicans were like him, it would be a better world,” Mr. Asfaw said.  Mr. Coffman rejects the characterization of himself as an opportunist. He did not have these immigrant communities among his constituents before, he said; now that he has learned about their struggles — like the plight of a young, undocumented immigrant who wants to go to a military academy and is held back only by her immigration status — he has changed his mind about some issues. He was one of a handful of Republicans to vote against a House bill that would have blocked President Obama’s executive order to shield as many as five million illegal immigrants from deportation.  “When you’re with people and you hear stories like that, it changes your view,” Mr. Coffman said.  But Mr. Coffman has not reached Maria Gonzalez. After she listened to the conversation in Ms. Carroll’s campaign office for more than an hour, her story came spilling out: how her parents brought her into the country illegally; how immigration complications tore her family apart; how she became a citizen and successful businesswoman.  “The doors have been closed on me. You have no idea,” Ms. Gonzalez said, her voice raising and breaking as she began to cry. “And so when I hear people like Donald Trump and Mike Coffman — are you serious? You don’t know that I represent so many immigrants of this country.”
People who have been added to the list since a tape of Mr. Trump making vulgar remarks surfaced.  What Trump Said When They Walked
“You can do anything,” Mr. Trump says.  He also said he was compulsively drawn to kissing beautiful women “like a magnet” — “I don’t even wait” — and talked about plotting to seduce the married woman by taking her furniture shopping. Mr. Trump, who was 59 at the time he made the remarks, went on to disparage the woman, whom he did not name, saying, “I did try and fuck her. She was married,” and saying, “She’s now got the big phony tits and everything.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Friday night, Speaker Paul D. Ryan withdrew an invitation for Mr. Trump to appear alongside him in Wisconsin this weekend. Mr. Ryan described himself in a statement as “sickened” by Mr. Trump’s remarks.  Hours before his video apology, Mr. Trump released a statement on Friday afternoon expressing regret “if anyone was offended” by his comments, but he tried to play down the tape as a snippet of “locker room banter.”  His running mate, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, brushed off the banter at a rally in Rossford, Ohio. “They’ll say, this time we got him,” Mr. Pence said. “This time we got another thing, another issue that’s come forward. Then they turn on the next television the next morning, and Donald Trump is still standing stronger than ever before and fighting for the American people.”  But Mr. Pence also telephoned Mr. Trump on Friday night and urged him to show humility, according to an adviser to the nominee who requested anonymity to reveal a private conversation. (Mr. Trump had already decided to apologize when Mr. Pence called, the adviser noted.)  Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, issued a statement late Friday night calling on Mr. Trump to express contrition — and possibly offering other Senate Republicans cover to disavow the nominee if he refused to apologize.  “As the father of three daughters, I strongly believe that Trump needs to apologize directly to women and girls everywhere, and take full responsibility for the utter lack of respect for women shown in his comments on that tape,” Mr. McConnell said.  While neither Mr. Ryan nor Mr. McConnell immediately withdrew formal support for Mr. Trump, Republican leaders in Washington held anguished discussions throughout the evening about how the party should proceed with a badly wounded and potentially toxic nominee. They cannot remove their nominee from the ticket, but some Republican lawmakers called on Mr. Trump to step down voluntarily, including Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois, who previously said he would not support Mr. Trump, and Representatives Mike Coffman of Colorado and Barbara Comstock of Virginia.  Senator Mike Lee of Utah, who also has not endorsed Mr. Trump, recorded a live video on Facebook in which he asked the candidate, “with all due respect, to step aside.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump, seeking to minimize the import of the disclosure despite the public rebuke by Mr. Ryan, announced late Friday evening that he would no longer travel to Wisconsin as planned and would send Mr. Pence in his stead. Mr. Trump said he would spend Saturday preparing for his second debate with Hillary Clinton, set to take place Sunday in St. Louis.  Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly attacked and mocked Mrs. Clinton’s marriage in recent weeks, also sought to implicate Bill Clinton in his coarse conduct.  “Bill Clinton has said far worse to me on the golf course — not even close,” Mr. Trump said in a statement. “I apologize if anyone was offended.”  Video  And in his video apology later, he said: “I’ve said some foolish things. But there’s a big difference between the words and actions of other people. Bill Clinton has actually abused women, and Hillary has bullied, attacked, shamed and intimidated his victims.”  Mr. Trump has repeatedly threatened to attack Mrs. Clinton over her husband’s affairs and how she responded to them.  The disclosure of the recording comes at the end of a punishing two weeks, during which Mr. Trump has faced intense backlash over his treatment of women and intensifying scrutiny of his personal finances and views on national security.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign condemned Mr. Trump forcefully for the comments captured on the recording. Her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, said in response to the remarks, “It makes me sick to my stomach.”  More Republicans joined in the denunciation, including Gov. Gary Herbert and Representative Jason Chaffetz, both of Utah, who had said this summer that they would vote for Mr. Trump, and on Friday retracted their support.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Donald Trump’s statements are beyond offensive & despicable,” Mr. Herbert wrote on Twitter. “While I cannot vote for Hillary Clinton, I will not vote for Trump.”  Mr. Trump had already been on the defensive on Friday after telling CNN that he still believed the exonerated defendants known as the Central Park Five were guilty of a 1989 rape of a female jogger despite DNA evidence to the contrary that later overturned their convictions. Earlier in the day, he also asserted, again without evidence, that the Obama administration was allowing illegal immigrants to enter the country in order to vote in November.  Also in the last week, The New York Times reported that Mr. Trump had declared a $916 million loss on his 1995 income tax returns, a tax deduction so substantial it could have allowed him to legally avoid paying any federal income taxes for up to 18 years.  For Republicans on the ballot this fall, the uproar over Mr. Trump’s past statements about women touched off an agonizing political cycle, marked by partial denunciations of Mr. Trump — and demands from Democrats that their denunciations go further. Republican candidates for the House and Senate, and for governorships across the country, chastised Mr. Trump sternly but stopped short of renouncing him as their choice for the presidency.  One Republican senator seeking re-election, Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, who was criticized this week when she called Mr. Trump a role model for children, said his comments were “totally inappropriate and offensive.”  Ms. Ayotte, one of the most prominent women in the party, was facing immense pressure Friday night from other Republicans to disavow Mr. Trump entirely, and was said to be considering it. In an illustration of the Democratic onslaught, her opponent, Gov. Maggie Hassan, called Mr. Trump’s comments inexcusable.  “It is beyond comprehension how Senator Ayotte could continue to support this man for the highest office in the land, let alone call him a role model,” Ms. Hassan said.  Senator John McCain of Arizona, who has endorsed Mr. Trump, said, “There are no excuses for Donald Trump’s offensive and demeaning comments.” He was clearly worried about how they might affect his own re-election campaign, adding, “He alone bears the burden of his conduct and alone should suffer the consequences.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Another Republican to turn his back on Mr. Trump on Friday was Jon M. Huntsman, the former governor of Utah, who just a week ago said he planned to vote for Mr. Trump. He told The Salt Lake Tribune that the nominee should withdraw from the race.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “In a campaign cycle that has been nothing but a race to the bottom — at such a critical moment for our nation — and with so many who have tried to be respectful of a record primary vote, the time has come for Governor Pence to lead the ticket,” Mr. Huntsman told the newspaper.  Mr. Trump’s behavior has at times startled and unnerved women in his life, from employees at his company to the contestants in his beauty pageants, The Times found after interviewing dozens of them for an article in May. They described unwanted romantic advances and unending commentary on the female form.  Temple Taggart, Miss Utah in 1997, was uncomfortable with how forward Mr. Trump was with young contestants like her in his first year as the owner of Miss USA, a branch of the beauty pageant organization. As she recalls it, he introduced himself in an unusually intimate manner.  “He kissed me directly on the lips. I thought, ‘Oh, my God. Gross.’ He was married to Marla Maples at the time,” she said. “I think there were a few other girls that he kissed on the mouth. I was like, “Wow, that’s inappropriate.”  Dawn Laguens, the executive vice president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, suggested Mr. Trump had discussed committing a violent crime in his 2005 conversation with Mr. Bush.  “What Trump described in these tapes amounts to sexual assault,” said Ms. Laguens. “Trump’s behavior is disgusting and unacceptable in any context, and it is disqualifying for a man who is running for president of this country.”  The recording of Mr. Trump talking to Mr. Bush was made as they sat on a bus on the set of a soap opera where Mr. Trump was making a cameo appearance. The conversation was recorded after he had married Melania Trump, his third and current wife. At one point, the conversation in the video was interrupted when an actress arrived to take Mr. Trump and Mr. Bush to the set. Mr. Trump seemed excited.  “You know I’m automatically attracted to beautiful — I just start kissing them,” Mr. Trump says. “It’s like a magnet. Just kiss. I don’t even wait.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Trump was pregnant at the time that Mr. Trump’s remarks were recorded in mid-September 2005; their son, Barron, was born the next March.
And Hillary Clinton, Mr. Trump’s Democratic opponent, said he “was not a normal presidential candidate.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Someone who attacks everybody has something missing,” she told a crowd at a campaign stop in Youngstown, Ohio. “I don’t know what it is. I’m not going to get into that.”  Mr. Khan’s speech at the convention in Philadelphia was one of the most powerful given there. It was effectively the Democratic response to comments Mr. Trump has made implying many American Muslims have terrorist sympathies or stay silent when they know ones who do. Mr. Trump has called to ban Muslim immigration as a way to combat terrorism.  At the convention, Mr. Khan spoke about how his 27-year-old son, Humayun Khan, an Army captain, died in a car bombing in 2004 in Iraq as he tried to save other troops.  He criticized Mr. Trump, saying he “consistently smears the character of Muslims,” and pointedly challenged what sacrifices Mr. Trump had made. Holding a pocket-size copy of the Constitution, he asked if Mr. Trump had read it. Mr. Khan’s wife stood silently by his side.  Mr. Trump told Mr. Stephanopoulos that Mr. Khan seemed like a “nice guy” and that he wished him “the best of luck.” But, he added, “If you look at his wife, she was standing there, she had nothing to say, she probably — maybe she wasn’t allowed to have anything to say, you tell me.”  Mr. Trump also told Maureen Dowd of The New York Times on Friday night, “I’d like to hear his wife say something.”  In a statement late Saturday, Mr. Trump called Captain Khan a “hero,” and reiterated his belief that the United States should bar Muslims from entering the country.  “While I feel deeply for the loss of his son,” he added, “Mr. Khan, who has never met me, has no right to stand in front of millions of people and claim I have never read the Constitution, (which is false) and say many other inaccurate things.”  Photo  Even given Mr. Trump’s reputation for retaliating when attacked, his remarks about the Khans were startling. They called to mind one of his earliest counterpunches of the campaign, when he responded to criticism from Senator John McCain of Arizona, once a prisoner of war in Vietnam, by saying at a forum in Iowa, “I like people that weren’t captured.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. McCain has a long history in the public eye. The Khans, before their convention appearance, had none.  “Trump is totally void of any decency because he is unaware of how to talk to a Gold Star family and how to speak to a Gold Star mother,” Mr. Khan said on Saturday.  Ms. Khan did speak on Friday to MSNBC’s Lawrence O’Donnell, saying she “cannot even come in the room where his pictures are.”  When she saw her son’s photograph on the screen behind her on the stage in Philadelphia, she said, “I couldn’t take it.”  “I controlled myself at that time,” she said, while choking back tears. “It is very hard.”  In his interview with The Times, Mr. Khan said his wife had helped him craft his convention speech, and told him to remove certain attacks he had wanted to make against Mr. Trump.  But on Saturday, he unmuzzled himself. “Unlike Donald Trump’s wife, I didn’t plagiarize my speech,” Mr. Khan said, referring to how several lines from a Michelle Obama speech found their way into Melania Trump’s address at the Republican National Convention.  “I also wanted to talk about how he’s had three wives, and yet he talks about others’ ethics and their religion,” Mr. Khan said. “She said, ‘Don’t go to his level. We are paying tribute to our son.’”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump’s comments provoked another avalanche of criticism on social media, and again put Republican leaders in a difficult position, facing new demands that they repudiate their presidential nominee.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Even before Mr. Trump’s remarks to ABC News, Mr. Khan had asked that Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, and Paul D. Ryan, the House speaker, denounce Mr. Trump.  On Saturday, neither directly addressed Mr. Trump’s new comments. Don Stewart, a spokesman for Mr. McConnell, referred to Mr. McConnell’s response last year that a ban on Muslims entering the United States would be unacceptable.  AshLee Strong, a spokeswoman for Mr. Ryan, delivered a similar response: “The speaker has made clear many times that he rejects this idea, and himself has talked about how Muslim Americans have made the ultimate sacrifice for this country.”  In the same ABC News interview, when Mr. Stephanopoulos said that Mr. Khan had pointed out that his family would not have been allowed into the United States under Mr. Trump’s proposed ban, the candidate replied, “He doesn’t know that.”  Photo  And when asked what he would say to the grieving father, Mr. Trump replied, “I’d say, ‘We’ve had a lot of problems with radical Islamic terrorism.’”  Mr. Stephanopoulos also noted that Mr. Khan said that Mr. Trump had “sacrificed nothing,” and had lost no one.  “I think I’ve made a lot of sacrifices,” Mr. Trump replied. “I’ve worked very, very hard. I’ve created thousands and thousands of jobs.”  Some of the fiercest condemnations on Saturday came from Republicans who have argued — unsuccessfully to date — that Mr. Trump is unfit to be president.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Tim Miller, a former communications director for Jeb Bush’s presidential campaign, called Mr. Trump’s comments “inhuman.”  “Memo to Trump supporters,” Peter Wehner, a speechwriter for President George W. Bush, wrote on Twitter. “He’s a man of sadistic cruelty. With him there’s no bottom. Now go ahead & defend him.”  Reihan Salam, a conservative writer for National Review and a frequent Trump critic, said that Mr. Trump had an opportunity to declare remorse for the Khans while still holding to his own views as a candidate.  “He might have asked why Humayun Khan had died in the first place — because of a war that many, if not most, Americans regard as a tragic blunder,” he said.  “There was really no benefit for Trump in suggesting that Ghazala Khan had been muzzled,” he added, “because she could easily come out and say that she had been too grief-stricken to speak, which she did.”  Ibrahim Hooper, the spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said on Saturday, “It’s really despicable that anyone, let alone a presidential candidate, would choose to dishonor the service of an American who gave his life for this nation.”  Ms. Khan, he said, “was obviously there to support her husband, who was offering what many people believe was the most impactful speech of the entire convention.”  As is often the case, Mr. Trump, who has had no campaign events this weekend, managed with a few words to overshadow Mrs. Clinton, who was making several stops in Ohio and Pennsylvania with her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia.  In the ABC News interview, Mr. Trump also hedged over whether he would participate in the three scheduled debates with Mrs. Clinton. He insinuated that she had worked to schedule two during football games so viewership would be lower, and said that the National Football League had sent him a letter complaining about the timing.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The debates were scheduled in September of last year by the bipartisan Commission on Presidential Debates. And while Joe Lockhart, a spokesman for the National Football League, said the league was not thrilled about the scheduling, “we did not send a letter to Trump.”
“It is unfortunate that my comments have been misconstrued as a categorical attack against people of Mexican heritage,” Mr. Trump said. “I am friends with and employ thousands of people of Mexican and Hispanic descent.”  “The American justice system relies on fair and impartial judges,” he added . “All judges should be held to that standard.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump, who did not apologize for the remarks, continued to express doubts about Judge Curiel, noting that he was appointed to the federal bench by President Obama.  “Due to what I believe are unfair and mistaken rulings in this case and the judge’s reported associations with certain professional organizations, questions were raised regarding the Obama-appointed judge’s impartiality,” Mr. Trump said. “It is a fair question. I hope it is not the case.”  Heeding calls from Republican leaders to focus on issues that matter to Americans, Mr. Trump said he remained focused on bringing jobs back to the country. He also insisted that he would win the Trump University case.  “While this lawsuit should have been dismissed, it is now scheduled for trial in November,” Mr. Trump said. “I do not intend to comment on this matter any further.”  In an interview with The New York Times last week, Mr. Trump said it was clear that he considered Judge Curiel’s heritage an issue: “I’m building the wall, I’m building the wall. I have a Mexican judge. He’s of Mexican heritage. He should have recused himself, not only for that, for other things.”  Some of Mr. Trump’s critics said that his statement did not go far enough. Jeb Bush, a former rival for the Republican nomination whose wife is from Mexico, has been largely silent since exiting the race but on Tuesday said that Mr. Trump should fully retract what he said.  “Donald Trump should retract his comments, not defend them,” Mr. Bush wrote in a post on Twitter. “There is no place for racism in the GOP, or this country.”
Video  Hillary Clinton and her running mate, Tim Kaine, released a new batch of their own income tax returns on Friday, ratcheting up the pressure on her opponent, Donald J. Trump, to begin making public his own forms.  The newest tax return of Mrs. Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, showed an adjusted gross income of $10.6 million for 2015, a large drop from previous years but still enough to place them in the top 0.1 percent of American households.  They paid about $3.6 million in federal taxes for an effective tax rate of about 35 percent.  More than half their income came from speeches; Mrs. Clinton also earned $3 million from “Hard Choices,” her memoir of her years as secretary of state.  Mr. Kaine, the Virginia senator, and his wife, Anne Holton, who was Virginia’s secretary of education until she stepped down last month, reported income of $313,441 for 2015.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But aside from their earnings, the release was intended to put a spotlight on Mr. Trump’s refusal to release his own returns. Mike Pence, the Indiana governor and Mr. Trump’s running mate, also has not made public his tax data during the campaign.  Mrs. Clinton’s spokeswoman, Jennifer Palmieri, said in a statement the release sets a “stark contrast” with Mr. Trump, whom she accused of “hiding behind fake excuses.”  “He has failed to provide the public with the most basic financial information disclosed by every major candidate in the last 40 years,” she said. “What is he trying to hide?”  The Trump campaign would not discuss his tax returns, but in a statement on Friday, a spokesman, Jason Miller, called Mrs. Clinton’s disclosure an effort to shield her from questions about her emails when she was secretary of state and about what favors were sought by donors to her family’s foundation.  “This document release is nothing more than an attempt at distraction and misdirection by an individual who created and then purged an illegal private email server,” he said.  If Mr. Trump does not make public the details of his taxes, he would be the first major party presidential nominee to decline to do so since Richard M. Nixon. Mr. Trump is not required as a candidate to reveal his taxes, but he has submitted his personal financial disclosure form outlining his business interests, which he is obligated to file.  While Mr. Trump has cited an I.R.S. audit as his reason for not releasing his taxes, the agency said in a statement this year, “Nothing prevents individuals from sharing their own tax information.”  The lack of a disclosure of his taxes has opened Mr. Trump to attacks, first during the Republican primary campaign and now in the months leading to the Nov. 8 general election.  Critics have questioned whether Mr. Trump has not released his taxes because his reported earnings could be underwhelming in comparison to his own statements about his net worth. Others have suggested that the tax documents would reveal business interests that could be problematic if he were elected.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  There have also been questions about how much Mr. Trump has paid in taxes over the years, whether he in fact paid any federal taxes some years, and whether he has followed through on his charitable pledges.  Given the expansive web of tax breaks available to real estate developers, tax experts say it would not be surprising if Mr. Trump paid little or no income taxes some years, even as he amassed billions of dollars in wealth.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The Clintons’ income has also brought scrutiny, and their returns hint at how much they have relied on their star power and government connections to catapult them into the ranks of the super rich. Though they were once seen as relatable to average Americans, polls suggest that many voters now see them as out of touch.  Their 2015 income, while less than half what they earned the previous year, put them well above the $2 million threshold for the top 0.1 percent of taxpayers, according to an analysis of federal income tax data by Emmanuel Saez, an economics professor at the University of California, Berkeley. They were within $1 million of reaching the 0.01 percent threshold — or the top 1 percent of the top 1 percent.  In recent years they have collected tens of millions of dollars in fees for speeches, including some delivered abroad and others sponsored by financial institutions.  Mrs. Clinton has faced calls to release the transcripts of her speeches, particularly from the three she gave for Goldman Sachs for a total of $675,000. Her primary opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders, and Mr. Trump have used those speeches to portray Mrs. Clinton as being chummy with Wall Street.  In 2015, before she officially began her campaign and stopped giving speeches, she earned $1.5 million in speaking fees. Her husband earned $5.25 million from speeches last year.  According to Mrs. Clinton’s personal financial disclosure filed in May, she and her husband made more than two dozen speeches in 2015 for $150,000 and up. Mr. Clinton earned $225,000 for a February speech sponsored by UBS Wealth Management, for example, and Mrs. Clinton gave a speech for eBay in March for $315,000. Mr. Clinton also earned $1.7 million from his consulting business, WJC L.L.C., after it brought in more than $6 million the year before, according to the tax returns.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The financial disclosure from earlier this year said that two sources of consulting income were Varkey GEMS Foundation, an international charity founded by Sunny Varkey, an education entrepreneur, and Laureate Education, a network of for-profit schools.  These financial ties — including the past speeches, business endeavors and well as donor relationships with the Clinton Foundation — have already attracted critics who say they include inherent conflicts of interest and could be problematic under a Clinton administration.  From 2007 to 2015, according to returns released Friday and previously, the Clintons made a total adjusted gross income of $150 million and paid $48 million in federal taxes. In the same period they gave $16 million to charity, including $1 million last year that went mostly to their family foundation.  The Clintons’ other income last year included $24,932 in interest, $84,358 in mutual fund dividends and $226,297 in pension payments from the federal and Arkansas governments.  Their deductions included $1.4 million in state income taxes and $98,244 in property taxes on their homes in Chappaqua, N.Y., and Washington. They also wrote off $41,040 in mortgage interest.
NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
“The architect and I didn’t know where he was coming from,” Ms. Res said. Years later, after she had gained a significant amount of weight, Ms. Res endured a stinging workplace observation about her own body from Mr. Trump. “ ‘You like your candy,’ ” she recalled him telling her. “It was him reminding me that I was overweight.”  Her colleague Louise Sunshine experienced similar observations from Mr. Trump when she gained weight. But she saw it as friendly encouragement, not a cruel insult. “He thought I looked much better thin,” she said. “He would remind me of how beautiful I was.”  Whenever possible, Mr. Trump wanted his visitors to see his most attractive employees, as Ms. Res learned.  We had a big meeting once. I grabbed one of the women in the office and sent her in to get lunch orders. Donald said, “Not her.” She didn’t look great. He got another woman to take the lunch orders. That was purely about looks. He wanted the people in that room to think that all the women who worked for him were beautiful. –Ms. Res  Mr. Trump frequently sought assurances — at times from strangers — that the women in his life were beautiful. During the 1997 Miss Teen USA pageant, he sat in the audience as his teenage daughter, Ivanka, helped to host the event from onstage. He turned to Brook Antoinette Mahealani Lee, Miss Universe at the time, and asked for her opinion of his daughter’s body.  “ ‘Don’t you think my daughter’s hot? She’s hot, right?’ ” Ms. Lee recalled him saying. ‘I was like, ‘Really?’ That’s just weird. She was 16. That’s creepy.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Brewer Lane, who dated Mr. Trump for several months in 1990 and early 1991, said it did not take long for him to solicit her view on the attractiveness of two of his previous romantic partners, Marla Maples and Ivana Trump.  He did ask me, on a scale of 1 to 10, what I thought of Marla. I thought that was very boyish of him. He asked me the same thing about Ivana. I said, obviously, she is your wife. A beautiful woman. What could you say but a 10? I am not going to judge your wife. –Ms. Brewer Lane  Mr. Trump said he did not know Ms. Brewer Lane very well, despite dating her. “I wouldn’t have asked anybody about how they rate other women,” he said.  Kissing, and Telling Everyone  He liked to brag about his sexual prowess and his desirability as a date, no matter who was around.  Barbara J. Fife, a deputy mayor under David N. Dinkins, New York’s mayor in the early 1990s, was not especially close to Mr. Trump. But that did not stop him from telling her why he was in such a hurry one day as he sat in her office at City Hall.  “I have this great date tonight with a model for Victoria’s Secret,” Ms. Fife recalled him telling her.  “I saw it as immature, quite honestly,” she said.  At his office in Trump Tower, Mr. Trump seemed eager for his colleagues to hear about his new companion, Ms. Maples. When The New York Post feasted on her supposed satisfaction with him in bed, captured in the headline “Best Sex I’ve Ever Had,” Mr. Trump was unabashed, Ms. Res said.  He absolutely loved that. He waved it around the office. “Did you see this?” Everyone who worked there were kind of horrified. We all thought it made him look bad. He didn’t. –Ms. Res  Mr. Trump denies boasting about the headline. He seems more bashful these days, saying he cannot recall how many women he has dated. “Not as many as people would think,” he said. “I’m not somebody that really loved the dating process.”  Women as Trusted Colleagues  To build his business, Mr. Trump turned to women for a simple reason: They worked hard — often harder than men, he told them.  When Mr. Trump hired Ms. Res to oversee the construction of Trump Tower, he invited her to his apartment on Fifth Avenue and explained that he wanted her to be his “Donna Trump” on the project, she said. Few women had reached such stature in the industry.  Photo  He said: “I know you’re a woman in a man’s world. And while men tend to be better than women, a good woman is better than 10 good men.” … He thought he was really complimenting me. –Ms. Res  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He entrusted several women in his company with enormous responsibility — once they had proven themselves worthy and loyal. Ms. Sunshine had little experience in real estate, but as a top campaign fund-raiser for Gov. Hugh Carey of New York, she had fulfilled a lifelong wish for Mr. Trump: She secured him a vanity license plate with his initials, DJT, which adorned his limousine for years.  It’s something he had wanted since his father bought him toy cars. By some gift of God, I was able to obtain it for him. He was beyond thrilled. And I became the woman in his life who could do no wrong. And he became the man in my life who was going to be my mentor. –Louise Sunshine, former Trump executive  Ms. Sunshine worked for Mr. Trump for 15 years, becoming a major New York real estate figure in her own right. Ms. Res remained at the company for 12 years, left after a disagreement over a project and then returned as a consultant for six more years. Both expressed gratitude for the chances Mr. Trump had taken on them.  In a rough-and-tumble industry thoroughly dominated by men, Mr. Trump’s office stood out for its diversity, recalled Alan Lapidus, an influential architect who designed the Trump Plaza casino in Atlantic City.  He is a lot more complicated than the cartoon character. The top people in his company were women, like Barbara Res. For any company to hire a woman as chief of construction was actually startling. I don’t know of a single other developer who had a woman in that position. The respect for women was always there. That’s why, in spite of the comments he makes now — and God knows why he says these things — when he was building his empire, the backbone was women. –Alan Lapidus, architect  Dismissive Nicknames  To women who had climbed to positions of power outside his company, Mr. Trump’s behavior could feel like a jarring throwback.  Alair A. Townsend was for a time the highest-ranking woman inside New York’s City Hall during the Koch administration, with the title of deputy mayor for economic development. But when Mr. Trump called her, she said, her position seemed less relevant to him than her gender.  He was dismissive. It was always, “Hon,” “Dear.” Things he wouldn’t have said to a man. It was designed to make you feel small. And he did that repeatedly. –Alair A. Townsend, former deputy mayor  It was an unthinking habit when he interacted with women, colleagues said. “At Trump Tower,” said Ms. Res, his longtime colleague, “he called me Honey Bunch.”  Wife and Partner, and Regret  No single figure better encapsulated the paradoxes of Mr. Trump’s treatment of women in the workplace than his first wife, Ivana.  He entrusted her with major pieces of a corporate empire and gave her the titles to match. She was the president of Trump’s Castle, a major casino in Atlantic City, and the Plaza Hotel, the storied complex on Central Park South in Manhattan. “She ran that hotel,” Ms. Res said. “And she ran it well.”  Photo  But he compensated her as a spouse, not a high-level employee, paying her an annual salary of $1 for the Trump’s Castle job, according to her tax documents. And he grew to resent her outsize role. By the end of their marriage, Mr. Trump wrote in his 1997 book, “The Art of the Comeback,” he regretted having allowed her to run his businesses.  My big mistake with Ivana was taking her out of the role of wife and allowing her to run one of my casinos in Atlantic City, then the Plaza Hotel. The problem was, work was all she wanted to talk about. When I got home at night, rather than talking about the softer subjects of life, she wanted to tell me how well the Plaza was doing, or what a great day the casino had. I will never again give a wife responsibility within my business. –Donald J. Trump, presumptive Republican nominee  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He seems to have kept his word. His current wife, Melania, has marketed her own lines of beauty products and jewelry. But Mr. Trump remains mostly uninvolved in her work. After calling it “very successful,” he struggled to describe it.  “What is it on television with the sales?” he asked. “What do they call that? Not Home Shopping, the other one.”  Accusations and Denials  Once his first marriage started to collapse, Mr. Trump faced his most serious allegations of aggression toward women.  When “Lost Tycoon: The Many Lives of Donald J. Trump,” by the journalist Harry Hurt III, was released in 1993, it included a description of a night in which Mr. Trump was said to have raped Ivana in a fit of rage. It also included a statement from Ivana that Mr. Trump’s lawyers insisted be placed in the front of the book. In the statement, she described an occasion of “marital relations” during which “I felt violated, as the love and tenderness, which he normally exhibited toward me, was absent.”  “During a deposition given by me in connection with my matrimonial case, I stated that my husband had raped me,” the statement said. “I referred to this as a ‘rape,’ but I do not want my words to be interpreted in a literal or criminal sense.”  Mr. Trump denied raping Ivana, and she did not respond to a request for comment. After the allegation re-emerged in the news media last year, Ivana said in a statement, “The story is totally without merit.”  In the early 1990s, Jill Harth and her boyfriend at the time, George Houraney, worked with Mr. Trump on a beauty pageant in Atlantic City, and later accused Mr. Trump of inappropriate behavior toward Ms. Harth during their business dealings. In a 1996 deposition, Ms. Harth described their initial meeting with Mr. Trump at Trump Tower.  Donald Trump stared at me throughout that meeting. He stared at me even while George was giving his presentation. … In the middle of it he says to George, “Are you sleeping with her?” Meaning me. And George looked a little shocked and he said, “Well, yeah.” And he goes, “Well, for the weekend or what?” –Jill Harth, former pageant promoter  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Houraney said in a recent interview that he was shocked by Mr. Trump’s response after he made clear that he and Ms. Harth were monogamous.  “He said: ‘Well, there’s always a first time. I am going after her,’ ” Mr. Houraney recalled, adding: “I thought the man was joking. I laughed. He said, ‘I am serious.’ ”  By the time the three of them were having dinner at the Oak Room of the Plaza Hotel the next night, Mr. Trump’s advances had turned physical, Ms. Harth said in the deposition.  “Basically he name-dropped throughout that dinner, when he wasn’t groping me under the table,” she testified. “Let me just say, this was a very traumatic thing working for him.”  Ms. Harth, who declined to comment, gave the deposition in connection with a lawsuit that alleged Mr. Trump had failed to meet his obligations in a business partnership. Mr. Trump settled that case but denied wrongdoing. Ms. Harth withdrew her own lawsuit against Mr. Trump alleging unwanted advances, but she has stood by her original claims.  Mr. Trump said it was Ms. Harth who had pursued him, and his office shared email messages in which Ms. Harth, over the past year, thanked Mr. Trump for helping her personally and professionally and expressed support for his presidential candidacy.  Defending His Record  Mr. Trump says the world misunderstands his relationship with women.  He sees himself as a promoter of women — a man whose business deals, like the purchase of the struggling Miss Universe pageant, have given them untold opportunities for employment and advancement. “Hundreds and hundreds of women, thousands of women, are the better for it,” he said.  He has groomed his daughter, Ivanka, to run his company. And as a chief executive, he said, he admires women for a work ethic that can exceed that of the men around them. Mr. Trump recalled a telling exchange with a female worker.  I’ve said, “Why don’t you go home and take it easy now, just go relax.” “No, Mr. Trump, I have to finish this job.” And I said, “Boy, you really are a worker.” And it would just seem that there was something, that they want to really prove something, which is wonderful. –Mr. Trump  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Several women who have held positions of power within the Trump Organization in recent years said they had never known Mr. Trump to objectify women or treat them with disrespect.  “I think there are mischaracterizations about him,” said Jill Martin, a vice president and assistant counsel at the company. Ms. Martin said Mr. Trump had enthusiastically supported her decision to have two children over the past five years, even when it meant working from home and scaling back on business travel.  “That’s hard with women lawyers,” she said. “For me, he’s made it a situation where I can really excel at my job and still devote the time necessary for my family.”  After competing in the 2009 Miss USA pageant, Laura Kirilova Chukanov, a Bulgarian immigrant who lived in Utah, met with Mr. Trump in his New York office and explained that she wanted to make a documentary about her home country. Mr. Trump encouraged the project and followed through on a promise to put her in touch with his production company.  “He genuinely wanted to know what I wanted to do with my life and how he could help,” Ms. Chukanov said.  A Damaging Critique  But when Mr. Trump lost confidence in women, he could inflict lasting damage on their lives.  After Alicia Machado won the 1996 Miss Universe title, something very human happened: She gained weight. Mr. Trump did not keep his critique of her changing body quiet — he publicly shamed her, she said.
Here are the rest of the highlights:  • An audience member asked the candidates to name one positive quality in their opponent. Mrs. Clinton jumped in first. “I respect his children,” she said. “His children are incredibly able and devoted and I think that says a lot about Donald. I don’t agree with nearly anything else he says or does, but I do respect that.” Mr. Trump, expressing gratitude for the compliment, offered his own. “I will say this about Hillary: She doesn’t quit,” he said. “She doesn’t give up. I respect that.” The debate ended, and the pair shook hands.  Video  • Pressed on the 2005 recording which he seemed to boast of sexually assaulting women, Mr. Trump said he was “not proud of” the behavior, saying that he had apologized to his family and the American people. But he disputed that the recording amounted to bragging about sexual assault, calling his comments “locker room talk.” “I have great respect for women,” he said. “Nobody has more respect for women than I do,” he said, adding, “I was embarrassed by it.”  • Mrs. Clinton, responding to Mr. Trump’s remarks about the recording, said that while she disagreed with past Republican nominees, “I never questioned their fitness to serve.” “Donald Trump is different,” she said. She suggested that, despite Mr. Trump’s insistence that the recording did not reflect his character, “It’s clear to anyone who heard it that it represents exactly who he is.”  • Mr. Trump turned the discussion of his lewd remarks on Mr. Clinton, arguing that his “words” did not compare to Mr. Clinton’s history with women. “If you look at Bill Clinton, far worse,” Mr. Trump said. Mrs. Clinton did not address the attacks on her husband. “He gets to run his campaign any way he chooses,” she said. She paraphrased Michelle Obama’s speech at the Democratic convention to describe her approach: “When they go low, you go high.”  Video  • Addressing Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump said that if he wins, “I am going to instruct my attorney general to get a special prosecutor to look into your situation,” citing her use of a private email server as secretary of state. Mrs. Clinton pointedly said she could not spend all of her time fact-checking Mr. Trump, advising viewers to go to her website to see his falsehoods. She said it was a good thing that Mr. Trump was not in charge of the laws in the country. “Because you’d be in jail,” Mr. Trump shot back. Cheers could be heard from the crowd.  • Mrs. Clinton said Mr. Trump was plainly trying to divert attention from his own campaign — “the way it’s exploding and the way Republicans are leaving you.” Mr. Trump asked a moderator, Mr. Cooper, why he had not spent more time discussing Mrs. Clinton’s private email server. (The other moderator, Martha Raddatz, had in fact brought it up moments earlier.) Mr. Trump was unmoved. “Nice, one on three,” he said, suggesting the moderators were teaming up on him.  • Asked about how to stop Islamophobia, Mr. Trump said, “You’re right about Islamophobia and that’s a shame.” But he pivoted immediately to a discussion of what he called “radical Islamic terrorists,” citing the mass shooting in Orlando, Fla., and the attacks on the World Trade Center, among other atrocities. Mrs. Clinton suggested Mr. Trump’s statements throughout the campaign had been destructive. “We are not at war with Islam,” she said. “It plays into the hands of the terrorists to act as though we are.”  • Pushed repeatedly to answer whether his proposed ban on Muslim immigration still stood, Mr. Trump deflected, saying his plans amounted to “extreme vetting” and accusing a moderator, Ms. Raddatz, of favoring Mrs. Clinton. Mrs. Clinton said it was “important for us, as a policy” not to ban people based on religion. “How do you do that?” she asked. “We are a country founded on religious freedom and liberty.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • After Mr. Trump said again that he opposed the war in Iraq, despite past public statements that contradict him, Mrs. Clinton reiterated that “we have it on tape” that Mr. Trump had not been against the war before it began. “It’s not been debunked,” he insisted, turning the issue back on Mrs. Clinton. “You voted for it and you shouldn’t have.”  • A black audience member asked if the candidates could serve as president for “all Americans.” Mr. Trump said that he could, before moving quickly to a standard of his stump speech: wondering aloud what some voters “have to lose.” “It can’t get any worse,” he said. After Mr. Trump again criticized Mrs. Clinton’s Senate tenure, she noted that she won re-election by a wide margin. She added, “If you don’t vote for me, I still want to be your president.”  • Mrs. Clinton was asked about a remark, leaked from a private speech, in which she seemed to stress the importance of keeping both a public and a private position on given issues as a political figure. She said she was following the example of Abraham Lincoln as he sought to convince lawmakers to ally with him. “Now she’s blaming the lie on the late, great Abraham Lincoln,” Mr. Trump said. “Honest Abe never lied.”  • Mrs. Clinton cited the specter of Russian hackers seeking to influence the election with strategic leaks, which she suggested were intended to help Mr. Trump. “Believe me, they’re not doing it to get me elected,” she said. (She has spoken often of Mr. Trump’s kind words for Vladimir V. Putin, Russia’s president.) Mr. Trump claimed ignorance. “Maybe there is no hacking,” he said, adding, “I know nothing about Russia.”  • Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump tussled over taxes, touching on Mr. Trump’s efforts to avoid paying them given past losses. He was giving “zero for our vets, zero for our military,” she said. “That is wrong.” Asked directly if Mr. Trump had used a near-billion-dollar loss in the mid-1990s to avoid paying taxes, he replied, “Of course I do. Of course I do.” He accused Mrs. Clinton of not doing enough as a senator to reform the tax code.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  • Asked by an audience member about coarseness in the presidential race, Mrs. Clinton said it was “very important for us to make clear to our children that our country really is great because we’re good.” She reminded the crowd of her campaign slogan, “Stronger Together.” Mr. Trump, who before the debate appeared with women who have accused Bill Clinton of sexual assault, said he broadly agreed with Mrs. Clinton. “I began this campaign because I was so tired of seeing such foolish things happen to our country,” he said.  • In response to a question on the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Trump called the program “a disaster.” “You know it, we all know it,” he said. Mrs. Clinton was asked about recent remarks from her husband, in which he appeared to criticize Mr. Obama’s signature legislative achievement. “He clarified what he meant,” Mrs. Clinton said. “If we were to start all over again, we might come up with a different system,” she said. “But we have an employer-based system.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • Asked about the humanitarian crisis in Syria, Mrs. Clinton called the situation “catastrophic,” pivoting to criticize Russia and accusing the country’s leadership again of favoring Mr. Trump for president. Asked the same question, Mr. Trump said Mrs. Clinton “talks tough against Russia, but our nuclear program has fallen way behind.” When Ms. Raddatz, a moderator, brought up the remarks of Mr. Trump’s running mate, Mike Pence, on Syria, Mr. Trump said, “He and I haven’t spoken and I disagree.”  • Mr. Trump attacked Mrs. Clinton for saying that half of Trump supporters could be placed in a “basket of deplorables.” “Believe me, she has tremendous hate in her heart,” Mr. Trump said. Mr. Cooper asked Mr. Trump if he had the discipline to lead, citing a recent “Twitter missive” in which he advised followers, without evidence, to “check out” a sex tape featuring a former pageant winner whose weight he had insulted in the 1990s. Mr. Trump denied that he had mentioned a sex tape. He also defended his favored social media practice: “Tweeting happens to be a modern-day form of communication,” he said. “I’m not un-proud of it.”    • Asked about the Supreme Court, Mrs. Clinton said she wanted “a Supreme Court that will stick with Roe v. Wade and a women’s right to choose.” Mr. Trump said he hoped to find judges “very much in the mold of Justice Scalia,” citing a list he has compiled of possible selections.  • Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump took the stage without shaking hands.
Mr. Pence said in a statement that he was “offended by the words and actions described by Donald Trump” in the video, and cast Mr. Trump’s second debate with Hillary Clinton, on Sunday, as an urgent moment to turn around the campaign.  Video  “I do not condone his remarks and cannot defend them,” Mr. Pence said, adding, “We pray for his family and look forward to the opportunity he has to show what is in his heart when he goes before the nation tomorrow night.”  By Saturday evening, no fewer than 36 Republican members of Congress and governors who had not previously ruled out supporting Mr. Trump disavowed his candidacy, an unprecedented desertion by the institutional Republican Party of its own standard-bearer just a month before Election Day.  The growing wall of opposition recalled the determination of the party establishment this year to deny Mr. Trump the nomination in the first place. He easily swatted away that effort, but Mr. Trump now finds himself in a far more precarious state. Facing a more vast and diverse electorate, his lightly organized campaign was already listing before the videotape was released.  Aides described Mr. Trump as shaken, watching news coverage of the video with a mix of disbelief and horror. Shortly after midnight, he had released a videotaped statement, saying, “I’ve said and done things I regret, and the words released today on this more than a decade-old video are one of them.”  Refusing to Drop Out  In a brief telephone interview on Saturday, he shrugged off the calls to leave, saying he would “never drop out of this race in a million years.”  “I haven’t heard from anyone saying I should drop out, and that would never happen, never happen,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s not the kind of person I am. I am in this until the end.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Far from sounding rattled, Mr. Trump insisted that he could still prevail in November.  “Oh, yeah, we can win — we will win,” he said. “We have tremendous support. I think a lot of people underestimate how loyal my supporters are.”  A couple of hours later, the campaign released a statement from his wife, Melania. “The words my husband used are unacceptable and offensive to me,” she said. “This does not represent the man that I know.”  “I hope people will accept his apology, as I have, and focus on the important issues facing our nation and the world,” she said.  But the situation had grown so dire that many in the party were all but pleading with him to withdraw and let Mr. Pence serve as the presidential nominee. On Saturday afternoon, Senator John Thune of South Dakota, the chairman of the Republican Conference, became the most senior Republican to call on Mr. Trump to make way for Mr. Pence.  The exodus began late Friday night when a handful of Utah Republicans who said they would support Mr. Trump indicated that they could no longer tolerate their nominee.  But it was not until a pair of conservative women, Representatives Barbara Comstock of Virginia and Martha Roby of Alabama, implored Mr. Trump to withdraw that previously hesitant Republicans stepped forward to reject Mr. Trump’s candidacy.  Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire was the first Republican senator facing a competitive re-election to say she would no longer back Mr. Trump, announcing in a statement that she would write in Mr. Pence for president instead.  “I’m a mom and an American first, and I cannot and will not support a candidate for president who brags about degrading and assaulting women,” she wrote on Twitter.  Ms. Ayotte was joined just hours later by Mr. McCain, who is also running for re-election, and Representative Joe Heck of Nevada, who is locked in a close race for the Senate seat now held by Harry Reid, the Democratic minority leader, who is retiring.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It was an admission that Mr. Trump now posed an immediate threat to their own candidacies and that, to have any chance to survive, they had to risk angering his ardent supporters. At a party gathering on Saturday in Wisconsin, Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who had disinvited Mr. Trump and said he was “sickened” by the video, was greeted with a few boos, and Mr. Heck was both jeered and applauded when he announced to a crowd in Nevada that he was not backing the presidential nominee.  Mr. Ryan told his crowd he would not be discussing “the elephant in the room,” the 2005 video showing a bus that had Mr. Trump aboard, and included an audio recording of him privately bantering with other men.  Mr. Trump, then newly married to Ms. Trump, crassly boasted about groping women’s genitals, vulgarly commented on their bodies and generally described women as sex objects who could not resist his advances.  In his video statement released early Saturday, Mr. Trump said: “Anyone who knows me knows these words don’t reflect who I am. I said it, I was wrong, and I apologize.”  “I pledge to be a better man tomorrow and will never, ever let you down,” he added, before ending the message with a promise to bring up the sex scandals of Bill Clinton’s presidency and Hillary Clinton’s response to them.  Concern at Trump Tower  Inside Trump Tower, though, Mr. Trump’s defiant public responses belied the reality of a 24-hour period in which he was alternately angry and distressed, according to two people with direct knowledge of his behavior who were granted anonymity to discuss private conversations.  Mr. Trump and his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, initially expressed skepticism upon hearing that such a recording existed, saying those comments did not sound like him. When Mr. Trump heard the tape played, he acknowledged it was him, but he believed the fallout would not be dramatic.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Pence, however, was dismayed, and called into Trump headquarters on Friday night to urge Mr. Trump to apologize.  On Saturday morning, Mr. Pence called Mr. Trump and told him he had to handle the next 48 hours alone because he did not think he would be an effective surrogate.  Mr. Trump, after monitoring television coverage, realized he was becoming isolated by his party.  Mr. Trump’s aides did not explicitly ask top advisers and allies to do their usual defense of Mr. Trump’s comments, according to one person briefed on the discussions, but they did ask people to stand by his side. A few supporters did, including Ben Carson; the conservative radio host Laura Ingraham; and Robert and Rebekah Mercer, the wealthy father and daughter who are perhaps Mr. Trump’s most important backers, and who said in a statement that they considered the video “locker room braggadocio.”  “America is finally fed up and disgusted with its political elite,” they said. “Trump is channeling this disgust, and those among the political elite who quake before the boombox of media blather do not appreciate the apocalyptic choice that America faces on Nov. 8.”  Two of Mr. Trump’s most prominent supporters — Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York — went to Trump Tower around noon to huddle with Mr. Trump and try to get in some debate preparation.  In the afternoon, more damaging news hit the web and cable television, with a CNN report on the numerous lewd and tasteless comments he had made over the years on “The Howard Stern Show.”  Just before 5 p.m., Mr. Trump emerged for about five minutes, briskly striding through his gilded lobby to a waiting crowd of supporters on the sidewalk. He pumped his right fist in the air as fans surrounded him.  “Hundred percent,” Mr. Trump told reporters who yelled questions about whether he would stay in the race.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Pence flew from Indianapolis to a fund-raising event in Rhode Island, where he told supporters that the election was about more than “one man,” said Joseph A. Trillo, the chairman of Mr. Trump’s campaign in the state. Over hors d’oeuvres in a Newport mansion, Mr. Pence offered a pep talk without making direct mention of the day’s dire events.  “He used the terminology that it’s a movement and it’s bigger than Donald Trump,” Mr. Trillo said.  At the same time, leading Republicans were demanding that the Republican National Committee, which has been helping the Trump campaign financially and organizationally, abandon Mr. Trump and turn its attention to salvaging other candidates down the ballot.  Representative Charlie Dent, Republican of Pennsylvania, said the committee should no longer “defend the indefensible.”  He called on Reince Priebus, the party chairman, to force Mr. Trump off the ticket — or face the consequences.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “The chairman of the R.N.C. must look out for the good of the party as a whole, so he should be working to get him to step down,” Mr. Dent said. “If he can’t, then he should step down.”  A Down-Ballot Effect  The committee remained silent on Saturday as members of Congress began fleeing from Mr. Trump, not responding to news media inquiries and, senior Republican officials said, not coordinating with other campaign organizations. However, one senior Republican official said Mr. Priebus was deeply distressed. He went to Trump Tower in the afternoon to talk to Mr. Trump.  Powerful donors and business interests signaled that they would redirect their attention to down-ballot candidates. Republican power brokers had hoped until recently that Mr. Trump might make a credible showing in the presidential election, aiding the party in its other crucial races.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Republicans now say that their worst fears have come to pass, as Mr. Trump has unraveled in a series of missteps after his first debate with Mrs. Clinton.  Even before Mr. Trump’s 2005 comments came to light, internal Republican polling showed him losing ground among three groups that had long been wary of his candidacy: independents, women, and voters with college degrees.  That slide is likely to accelerate now, Republicans said, potentially sending voters fleeing toward Democrats or convincing them that they should stay home on Nov. 8. Either outcome would be ruinous for Republican candidates beyond the presidential race.  “It will be difficult in the extreme for him to recover from this, but the biggest impact is likely to be its effect on all the down-ballot races,” said Fred Malek, the finance chairman of the Republican Governors Association, who called Mr. Trump’s comments “beyond disgusting.”  “If they pull the plug on support for Trump,” he said, “the vast majority of voters will certainly understand that and most will respect it.”
A defiant Trump says he will not step aside as his wife, Melania, released a statement.  Though he faced calls from many in his party to step aside, Mr. Trump vowed in an interview that he would “never drop out of this race in a million years.” He later took a stronger stance on Twitter.  Ms. Trump said in a statement on Saturday that although his words about women were “unacceptable and offensive” to her, she hoped that “people will accept his apology, as I have, and focus on the important issues facing our nation and the world.”  Photo  Mr. Trump showed up just before 5 p.m. in the lobby of Trump Tower in Manhattan, accompanied by his campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, and his eldest child, Donald Trump Jr. Security officials stopped reporters and attempted to bar them from getting near Mr. Trump as he went outside and immersed himself in a crowd of supporters, who had gathered hours earlier for a rally.  “Hundred percent,” Mr. Trump told reporters who yelled questions about whether he would stay in the race. He ignored other questions about his response to the defections by Republicans.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Separately, one of Mr. Trump’s advisers, Rudolph W. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York City, was seen on CNN getting into a car outside Trump Tower, which he had earlier entered for planned debate preparation sessions.  “There is nothing that will cause his dropping out,” Mr. Giuliani said. “That is wishful thinking of the Clinton campaign and those who have opposed him for a long time.”  Though two of his biggest financial backers are sticking with him ...  Robert and Rebekah Mercer, the Republican megadonors who previously supported Senator Ted Cruz, suggested Mr. Trump’s remarks were irrelevant to the race.  “If Mr. Trump had told Billy Bush, whoever that is, earlier this year that he was for open borders, open trade and executive actions in pursuit of gun control, we would certainly be rethinking our support for him,” they said in a statement.  The Mercers also compared Mr. Trump’s actions to Bill Clinton’s treatment of women. The tactic is a favorite of Mr. Trump’s supporters, including Sean Hannity, the Fox News host, who devoted most of his show on Friday evening to allegations of abuse by Mr. Clinton.  ... many prominent Republicans have rescinded endorsements and distanced themselves from him.  • Condoleezza Rice, the secretary of state under President George W. Bush, who has generally has not discussed politics since becoming a private citizen, called for Mr. Trump to leave the race. She said she hoped to support someone who has the dignity and stature to be president.  “Enough!” Ms. Rice said in a Facebook post. “Donald Trump should not be President. He should withdraw.”  • Mr. McCain, who has criticized Mr. Trump repeatedly, officially withdrew his backing. “I have wanted to support the candidate our party nominated,” he said in a statement. He added: “But Donald Trump’s behavior this week, concluding with the disclosure of his demeaning comments about women and his boasts about sexual assaults, make it impossible to continue to offer even conditional support for his candidacy.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • House Speaker Paul D. Ryan said he was “sickened” by Mr. Trump’s behavior and disinvited him from a Saturday event in Wisconsin. There, he referred obliquely to the episode. “There is an elephant in the room. That is not what we are here to talk about today.” (Here’s how Mr. Ryan and Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, have condemned Mr. Trump in past statements.)  • Former primary opponents such as Carly Fiorina and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio said Mr. Trump should stand down. Mr. Kasich declared that the warning signs were right and that he would never vote for Mr. Trump.  • Mr. Trump’s most strident defender, his running mate, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, called the remarks from the 2005 video indefensible.  • We are also tallying the number of Republican leaders who say they won’t vote for Mr. Trump.  Some Republicans want to dump Trump. Can they?  Experts say that swapping out a presidential nominee at this stage of the game would be virtually impossible unless Mr. Trump dies, becomes incapacitated or decides to quit.  Trying to change the Republican National Committee’s rules with so little time until Election Day would be a logistical nightmare, and those rules do not give the party the power to change the nominee because people are unhappy.  If Mr. Trump did decide to drop out, the logistics would also be challenging because ballots have been printed and voting has already started in many places. We break it down in our Q. and A.  Still, as unlikely as that scenario appears to be, that remains the best hope for finding a new nominee.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The debate on Sunday will be must-see TV.  The showdown between Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton on Sunday night takes on even greater importance after Mr. Trump’s latest controversy. Unless he speaks beforehand, it will be his first chance to publicly take questions about his behavior on the recording. The audience could approach 100 million.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Many Republicans who have yet to denounce Mr. Trump have suggested that the debate will be a make-or-break moment for him.  And here are our best photos from the week.  Take a look.
Photo  The recording that emerged on Friday revealing Donald J. Trump speaking in vulgar and demeaning terms about women prompted extraordinary backlash from Democrats and Republicans, raising questions about whether the Republican Party could dump its nominee at the last minute and find someone more viable a month before Election Day.  While the idea of replacing Mr. Trump has been a fantasy for some “Never Trump” Republicans for months, the reality is that removing him from the ticket at this point would be exceedingly complicated.  Here’s a look at some of the questions that Republicans are mulling.  Is it too late for Republicans to replace Trump?  “It’s the equivalent of a triple bank shot, really,” said Benjamin Ginsberg, a lawyer at Jones Day who was national counsel for the presidential campaigns of Mitt Romney and George W. Bush.  Mr. Ginsberg said that the Republican Party did not have a mechanism to replace a nominee just because it wants to. The party’s rules state that “the Republican National Committee is hereby authorized and empowered to fill any and all vacancies which may occur by reason of death, declination, or otherwise of the Republican candidate for president of the United States.”  That essentially means that Mr. Trump would have to die or become incapacitated for the Republican Party to replace him.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But isn’t “otherwise” in the R.N.C. rule book open to interpretation?  The use of the word “otherwise” has led some people to suggest that the party has some leeway for ridding itself of Mr. Trump. However, election law experts do not agree.  The issue came up before the Republican National Convention when critics of Mr. Trump mused about ways to keep him from winning the nomination. Josh Putnam, a political science lecturer at the University of Georgia, addressed the idea on his blog, FrontloadingHQ, in August and deemed it a nonstarter.  “The intention there was to allow the party latitude to replace someone who was incapacitated, neither dead nor dropped out of the race,” Mr. Putnam said. “It’s not about what to do if someone made some controversial comments on a tape 11 years ago and we want to replace them now.”  Mr. Putnam concluded that Mr. Trump’s dropping out of the race was the most probable scenario for getting him off the ticket absent a health calamity.  What if Trump did decide to quit?  If Mr. Trump dropped out of the race, the Republican National Committee would have to race against the clock to find a replacement that members could agree upon. The rules committee would scramble to determine who would be eligible to be nominated and how such a nomination would proceed.  The 168 committee members representing state delegations would have to hold a vote and, as Mr. Trump did at the convention in Cleveland, the new nominee would need to win at least 1,237 delegates to become the party’s standard-bearer.  Haven’t deadlines to get on state ballots passed?  Mr. Trump and the vice-presidential nominee, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, are already on the ballots across the country, and Mr. Ginsberg said that swapping the nominee would require a dizzying amount of litigation to try to get states to add someone else’s name and reprint their ballots.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Adding to the complexity is the fact that early and absentee voting has started in many places and, presumably, many ballots have been cast for Mr. Trump.  Mr. Ginsberg says that the laws are murky here, with voters technically picking “electors” who are bound in some states to whoever is the nominee and in other states to the specific candidates.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ideally for the party, votes cast for Mr. Trump would go to the new nominee, but that would probably be subject to litigation.  “It is an exercise of lawyers’ fantasies to imagine the litigation that would take place,” Mr. Ginsberg said. “You would have to amass an army of lawyers and send them to each state.”  Is there any precedent for all of this?  There is. Richard Winger, the editor of Ballot Access News, points out that in 1912, the Republican incumbent nominee for vice president, James Sherman, died in October. His name remained on the ballots but all of the Republican electors voted for the new vice-presidential nominee, Nicholas Murray Butler, who had been chosen in late October by the national Republican committee.  On the Democratic side, the death of Horace Greeley in 1872 came after the election but before the Electoral College cast its votes.  In that case, most electors voted for other presidential and vice-presidential candidates.  Congress rejected the votes by Democratic electors that went to Mr. Greeley, who had lost to Ulysses S. Grant.  “The electors are the deciders,” Mr. Winger said. “I suspect there are a few Republican electors who expect to be elected and who are planning to vote for someone other than Trump. I think both Evan McMullin and Gary Johnson are trying to persuade various likely Republican electors to vote against Trump in the Electoral College in December.”  What if Republicans really, really wanted to dump Trump?  The Republican National Committee could try to change its rules (or its rules about changing rules) and come up with a new way to find a different nominee.  Of course, this would probably bring chaos and cause Mr. Trump and his legions of supporters to declare the process “rigged.”
Looking tired and touting the virtues of congressional legislative processes, Mr. Ryan addressed a crowd of supporters on Saturday in Elkhorn, Wis.  Photo  Some Trump supporters could be heard screaming the candidate’s name in the background.  “It is a troubling situation,” Mr. Ryan said, alluding to the situation with Mr. Trump. “That is not what we are here to talk about today. Do you know what we do here at Fall Fest? We talk about ideas.”  The developments come as Republicans are trying desperately in the final weeks of a campaign season to maintain their control of the Senate and a firm majority in the House. Many are weighing, based on the particulars of their own states and districts and race dynamics, whether now is the moment to move away from Mr. Trump. In many cases, they are looking to Mr. Ryan to be their seer.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Ryan’s tepid backing of Mr. Trump has been less about fear of alienating Mr. Trump’s supporters — many Republicans in Congress need his base of white, high school-educated men to win re-election — than about worry of signaling to the thousands of Republicans who are ambivalent about Mr. Trump that they need not vote this year.  Should those Republicans stay home, they could potentially set off a chain reaction down the ballot. A huge turnout collapse would deeply threaten Senate Republican incumbents and plenty of House members, too.  “Donald Trump’s lewd comments are the latest in a series of remarks he has made ranging from inappropriate to reprehensible that demonstrate why he is unsuitable for the presidency,” said Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine.  “It was comments like these — including the statements he made about John McCain, a disabled reporter, the family of a fallen soldier and more — that caused me to decide this summer that I could not support his candidacy,” said Ms. Collins, who is not up for re-election.  If Mr. Ryan were thinking of withdrawing his support from Mr. Trump, as of Saturday, he still had only sent the nominee back to his room to think about his remarks. “I hope Mr. Trump treats this situation with the seriousness it deserves and works to demonstrate to the country that he has greater respect for women than this clip suggests,” Mr. Ryan said.  As the most senior elected Republican — and the party leader who most publicly agonized over his endorsement of Mr. Trump — Mr. Ryan has for much of this year held outsize importance as the role model for how Republicans should deal with Mr. Trump. His reluctant endorsement was pushed by his rank-and-file, but it also beckoned to others to join the “Trump Train.”  Now, once again, the speaker’s actions are under intense scrutiny.  The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee released a statement even before Mr. Ryan uttered a (prepared) word:  “There have been more than enough ‘final straw’ moments during this campaign, and Speaker Ryan has continued to unabashedly put party first in supporting the most repulsive candidate for president that our country has ever seen,” Kelly Ward, the group’s executive director, said.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “If Speaker Ryan steps away from Trump, it will be an act of political expedience and desperate reputation-saving, which won’t redeem him or House Republicans in the eyes of voters.”  For scores of elected Republicans, Mr. Trump’s clash with parents who lost a son in combat in Iraq, his call to ban all Muslims from entering the country, his disparagement of a federal judge, his write-off of nearly $1 billion from his taxes and his derision of a former Miss Universe for gaining weight were not enough to force their hands. But for a growing handful of members of Congress, “hot mike” remarks aimed broadly at more than half the electorate were the final blow.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I’m out,” Representative Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah, told a local television station Friday night. “I can no longer in good conscience endorse this person for president. It is some of the most abhorrent and offensive comments that you can possibly imagine.”  But many more continued to ride the line between appalled and resigned. “As the father of three daughters,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, “I strongly believe that Trump needs to apologize directly to women and girls everywhere, and take full responsibility for the utter lack of respect for women shown in his comments on that tape.”  Democrats mocked the “template” of that “father of daughters” construction, pointing to nearly a dozen elected Republicans who used it.  For candidates in swing states, the pressure points have become more intense. This is particularly true in the case of Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, who is in what many believe to be the tightest re-election race in the country.  Ms. Ayotte, who has awkwardly bounced between distance from and acceptance of Mr. Trump, found herself in scalding hot water last week by suggesting during a debate with her opponent that Mr. Trump was a role model.  “It is beyond comprehension how Senator Ayotte could continue to support this man for the highest office in the land, let alone call him a role model,” said Gov. Maggie Hassan, who is challenging Ms. Ayotte for her seat. On Saturday morning, Ms. Ayotte completed her move away from Mr. Trump by saying she would not vote for him. She was followed by Representative Joe Heck, who is running for an open Senate seat in Nevada.  Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, last seen in photos looking mildly humiliated as he did phone bank work on behalf of Mr. Trump — a former rival who once put Mr. Cruz’s wife in his Twitter cross hairs — said on Twitter: “These comments are disturbing and inappropriate, there is simply no excuse for them.”  Mr. Ryan, who many believe wants to run for president himself, has not been actively urging his colleagues to vote for Mr. Trump, and has instead repeatedly talked about the House Republican policy agenda, clinging to a small pamphlet of policy ideas like a talisman in the storm, hoping his image survives.
Video  For hours on Friday night, the political world waited for the rarest of expressions from Donald J. Trump — a heartfelt apology.  What viewers got was anything but.  During a 90-second videotaped appearance, Mr. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, offered a strikingly brief articulation of regret for a decade-old audiotape in which he boasted about grabbing women’s genitals and said he could have his way with women because of his fame.  But his real message, which appeared early Saturday, was one of defiance. He described the controversy that upended the Republican Party for most of Friday as a mere “distraction,” and said that his vulgar remarks captured on the tape were nothing compared with the way Bill and Hillary Clinton had mistreated women.  If anything, Mr. Trump’s videotaped statement was a truncated version of a speech that he had given countless times. And it did not reflect the several hours of conference calls and strategy meetings among his top aides, who were at first stunned and then nearly paralyzed by the revelation of the tape, which they worried would be fatal to his White House hopes.  “That took 10 hours?” an incredulous Kevin Madden, a Republican strategist, asked on CNN immediately after the statement.  With his brow furrowed and his face a tight scowl, Mr. Trump sat hunched in a chair inside Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue, with the glittering nighttime New York City skyline behind him.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I’ve never said I’m a perfect person, nor pretended to be someone that I’m not,” said Mr. Trump, a 70-year-old real estate developer and former reality television star.  Then came the apologetic part.  “I’ve said and done things I regret, and the words released today on this more-than-a-decade-old video are one of them,” Mr. Trump said of the hot-mike recording of him bragging to Billy Bush, then the host of NBC’s “Access Hollywood,” about his groping and uninvited kissing of women.  “Anyone who knows me knows these words don’t reflect who I am,” Mr. Trump continued.  “I said it, I was wrong, and I apologize,” he said.  Oddly, Mr. Trump seemed to frame his comments not as sincere concern about those he may have hurt or offended, but as part of his own journey, describing his growth as a person and how humbling it has been for him to campaign across the nation and learn of other people’s worries and travails.  “I’ve traveled the country talking about change for America, but my travels have also changed me,” he said, describing meeting mothers who have lost children and people who have lost their jobs.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “I pledge to be a better man tomorrow and will never, ever let you down,” Mr. Trump said.  Grudging though they seemed, Mr. Trump’s comments were a marked departure from his lifelong resistance to any admission of fault. Mr. Trump values strength and power and disparages weakness. His usual response, when criticized or hurt, has been to counterpunch forcefully.  Before the release of the short statement, advisers to Mr. Trump had huddled with him at Trump Tower, along with his daughter Ivanka and son-in-law Jared Kushner, to discuss how to respond to the crisis. The advisers cautioned against holding a news conference, something that had been discussed, because it could become unwieldy and spin out of his control. They realized they needed to address the issue quickly, at a minimum to try to stop the defections of Republican officials who had begun to shun and loudly denounce him.  But one adviser to Mr. Trump cautioned before the statement that if the candidate mentioned Mrs. Clinton, it would fail.  Mr. Trump did just that.  “Hillary Clinton and her kind have run our country into the ground,” Mr. Trump said. “I’ve said some foolish things, but there’s a big difference between the words and actions of other people. Bill Clinton has actually abused women, and Hillary has bullied, attacked, shamed and intimidated his victims.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump then turned the focus to his second debate against Mrs. Clinton, less than 48 hours away.  Ever the performer and intimidator, he added, with a hint of menace in his voice: “We will discuss this more in the coming days. See you at the debate on Sunday.”
What followed was a thumping: Mr. Kaine reeled off chapter and verse on Mr. Trump’s musings on the Russian autocrat and Mr. Putin’s own record as president, from Russia’s struggling economy to his persecution of gay people and journalists. Mr. Pence tried repeatedly to argue that Mr. Trump hadn’t said the things Mr. Kaine had claimed. When that failed, he tried to suggest that merely quoting Mr. Trump was to engage in insults.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  That set Mr. Kaine up for a revealing summation. “Six times tonight I have said to Governor Pence I can’t imagine how you can defend your running mate’s position,” Mr. Kaine said. “He is asking everybody to vote for somebody that he cannot defend.”  Photo  Here are the highlights:  • Mr. Pence criticized Hillary Clinton for using a private email server as secretary of state. After Mr. Kaine said that Mrs. Clinton had been cleared by “a Republican F.B.I. director,” Mr. Pence fired back. “If your son or my son handled classified information the way Hillary Clinton did, they’d be court-martialed,” he said.  • Mr. Kaine, noting that he and his wife were the parents of a Marine, said that “the thought of Donald Trump as commander-in-chief scares us to death.” Mr. Pence replied that President Obama’s tenure had weakened the country’s standing in the world.  • After Mr. Kaine said that Mr. Trump had “pursued the discredited and really outrageous lie that President Obama wasn’t born in the United States,” Mr. Pence accused the Clinton-Kaine ticket of trafficking in “an avalanche of insults.” When Mr. Pence mentioned Russia, Mr. Kaine cut in. “You guys love Russia!” he said. Mr. Pence, appearing taken back by the interruption, said, “I must have hit a nerve.”  • Deflecting a question about Mr. Trump’s suggestion that he was savvy to avoid paying taxes, Mr. Pence said that his running mate was “a businessman, not a career politician.” Mr. Kaine interjected: “Why won’t he release his tax returns?” Mr. Pence shot back, “We’re answering the question about the business thing.”  Video  • Responding to a question about gun violence and the police, Mr. Kaine spoke of the mass shooting at Virginia Tech, which occurred when he was governor, and called for increased background checks and strengthening the ties between officers and the areas they patrol. Mr. Pence, who said his uncle was a police officer in Chicago, said, “at risk of agreeing with you, community policing is a great idea.” But he accused Democrats of “bad-mouthing” officers in the wake of shootings by the police.  Video  • Mr. Kaine unleashed a blistering attack on Mr. Trump’s trail of contentious comments during the campaign, ticking off his remarks about Mexicans, women, African-Americans, an Indiana-born judge with Mexican heritage and Senator John McCain of Arizona. “I just want to talk about the tone that’s set from the top,” Mr. Kaine said. Mr. Pence said his running mate’s statements were “small potatoes” compared to Mrs. Clinton’s remark last month that half of Mr. Trump’s supporters fit into a “basket of deplorables.” Mr. Kaine replied that Mrs. Clinton had apologized for her remark — though, as Mr. Pence pointed out, her apology focused on the “half,” not the descriptor. Mr. Trump, Mr. Kaine said, has refused to apologize for any of his comments.  • Mr. Kaine condemned Mr. Trump’s foreign policy credentials, saying that the Republican nominee “can’t start a Twitter war with Miss Universe without shooting himself in the foot.” Mr. Pence suggested that Mr. Kaine sounded rehearsed. “Did you work on that one a long time?” he asked. Mr. Pence said that America was “less safe today” than it was when Mr. Obama took office.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • Sparring over refugee policies, Mr. Pence and Mr. Kaine fiercely defended their running mates’ approaches, with Mr. Pence arguing that Mrs. Clinton would expose the country to heightened risks. Mr. Kaine framed it another way: “We want to keep people out if they’re dangerous,” he said. “Donald Trump said, ‘keep them out if they’re Muslim.’”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  • Mr. Pence, seizing on recent comments from Bill Clinton that appeared to be critical of the Affordable Care Act, said that “even former President Bill Clinton calls Obamacare a crazy plan.” (Mrs. Clinton’s team has moved this week to clarify his remarks, with her husband saying that he always supported the measure and still does.) Mr. Kaine did not immediately respond to the remark, setting off on an answer about Mrs. Clinton’s own economic plans.  • After Mr. Kaine mentioned Mr. Trump’s frequent praise of Vladimir Putin and the Trump campaign’s “shadowy connections with pro-Putin forces,” Mr. Pence blamed the Obama administration’s “weak and feckless foreign policy” for Russian aggression. “There’s an old proverb,” Mr. Pence said, “that says the Russian bear never dies, it just hibernates.”  • Mr. Kaine, turning repeatedly to Mr. Trump’s tax avoidance, sought to frame the issue as a matter of national security importance. After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Kaine said, “young men and women signed up to serve in the military to fight terrorism” and Mrs. Clinton fought for constituents as a New York senator. “Donald Trump was fighting a very different fight,” he said: skirting tax payments that might have boosted American defenses.  • Mr. Kaine accused Mr. Pence of declining to forcefully defend Mr. Trump during the debate, pointing to his frequent deflections when confronted with Mr. Trump’s past comments. “He is asking everybody to vote for somebody that he cannot defend,” Mr. Kaine said. Mr. Pence said he was happy to defend Mr. Trump and accused Mr. Kaine of both misrepresenting Mr. Trump and putting words in his mouth.  • Mr. Pence said that Mrs. Clinton had engaged in “pay-to-play politics” as secretary of state, citing potential conflicts of interest with the Clinton Foundation. “I am glad to talk about the foundation,” Mr. Kaine said. “The Clinton Foundation is one of the highest-rated charities in the world.” He turned the focus on Mr. Trump’s foundation, which he suggested — alluding to several newspaper investigations — had often veered far from traditional philanthropy.  • Asked about the tension between faith and a public life, Mr. Kaine recalled grappling with his opposition (and the Catholic Church’s) to the death penalty as governor of Virginia, where the law called for it in some cases. “It was very, very difficult to allow executions to go forward,” he said, adding that he promised voters he would carry out the duties of his office. Mr. Pence said he had “a great deal of respect for Senator Kaine’s sincere faith.” “That’s shared,” Mr. Kaine said.  • After Mr. Pence spoke about his opposition to abortion, Mr. Kaine sought to paint the Trump-Pence ticket as extreme on the issue, noting that Mr. Trump had once suggested that women should be punished for having abortions if the practice were outlawed. (Mr. Trump later walked back the remark.) “He’s not a polished politician like you and Hillary Clinton,” Mr. Pence said.
Photo  The first presidential debate between Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump this month will exclude two leading third-party nominees — Gary Johnson of the Libertarian Party and the Green Party’s Jill Stein — the Commission on Presidential Debates announced on Friday.  The failure to be invited to the Sept. 26 debate at Hofstra University deals a significant blow to Mr. Johnson and Ms. Stein, who are desperate for national exposure to promote their long-shot bids for the White House. Their running mates will also not be allowed to participate in the vice-presidential debate on Oct. 4, the commission said.  Mr. Johnson and Ms. Stein were excluded because they did not reach an average of 15 percent support in the five national polls that the commission used as a benchmark. Mr. Johnson, a former Republican governor of New Mexico who is polling in double-digits in many state polls, reached 8.4 percent and Ms. Stein reached 3.2 percent.  Candidates from smaller parties have complained to the commission, arguing that the threshold is too high for candidates who lack vast resources or name recognition. Mr. Johnson, who has acknowledged that he has little chance of becoming president if he is not allowed to debate, has started a petition that collected more than 800,000 signatures urging the commission to include him.  In a statement Friday, Mr. Johnson said: “I would say I am surprised that the C.P.D. has chosen to exclude me from the first debate, but I’m not. After all, the commission is a private organization created 30 years ago by the Republican and Democratic parties for the clear purpose of taking control of the only nationally televised presidential debates voters will see.”  Some polls have found that a majority of the American public would like to see more options on the debate stage, and prominent Republicans such as Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee, have said publicly that the Libertarian ticket should be part of the mix. Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who ran against Mrs. Clinton in the Democratic primary contest, said in a recent interview that he thought the 15 percent criteria was too onerous.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The chance of Mr. Johnson and Ms. Stein debating this fall have not been completely eliminated, however. The commission will run the numbers on its polls two more times and could potentially invite them to the second or third debates if their support swells.
Video  Gary Johnson, the former New Mexico governor and Libertarian Party presidential nominee, revealed a surprising lack of foreign policy knowledge on Thursday that could rock his insurgent candidacy when he could not answer a basic question about the crisis in Aleppo, Syria.  “What is Aleppo?” Mr. Johnson said when asked on MSNBC how, as president, he would address the refugee crisis in the war-torn Syrian city.  When pressed as to whether he was serious, Mr. Johnson indicated that he really was not aware of the city, which has been widely covered during the years that Syria has been engulfed in civil war. After Mike Barnicle, an MSNBC commentator who is often part of the “Morning Joe” program panel, explained that Aleppo was the center of Syria’s refugee crisis, Mr. Johnson struggled to recover.  “O.K., got it,” he said, explaining that he thinks that the United States must partner with Russia to diplomatically improve the situation there. “With regard to Syria, I do think that it’s a mess.”  The stumble could be a serious blow to Mr. Johnson’s campaign, just as he is making a final push to improve his standing in the polls. His support needs to reach 15 percent in a series of major national polls to be included in the presidential debates.  Mr. Johnson’s support has been hovering around 10 percent. He and his running mate, former Gov. Bill Weld of Massachusetts, have been aggressively making the case that they represent a viable alternative for voters who are not happy with the major party nominees, Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Johnson and Mr. Weld are both former two-term Republican governors who are socially liberal and fiscally conservative. While Libertarians are very free-trade oriented, they are often criticized for being isolationist and lacking interest in foreign policy.  Some leading Republicans who oppose Mr. Trump have said openly that they are giving the Libertarian ticket a serious look. On Wednesday night, Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee, publicly called for Mr. Johnson and Mr. Weld to be included in the presidential debates.  The stumble could derail such hopes and it was widely mocked on social media.  On Twitter the question “What is Aleppo?” was trending, with many critics arguing that Mr. Johnson had disqualified himself from the presidency.  Some even attributed the flub to Mr. Johnson’s acknowledged use of marijuana. He is a proponent of legalizing the drug and he was previously the chief executive of a business that marketed and sold recreational marijuana products.  Even Hillary Clinton, Mr. Johnson’s Democratic opponent, had a laugh at his expense on Thursday. Asked about the Libertarian candidate’s lack of knowledge about Aleppo during a news conference, she joked, “You can look on the map and find Aleppo.”  Thursday was not the first time that Mr. Johnson has faced such a situation. After speaking at a Politico convention in June, he was being directed to a room that was named after Harriet Tubman, the former slave and abolitionist. According to a report in The New Yorker, Mr. Johnson asked, “Who’s Harriet Tubman?”  Mr. Johnson expressed disappointment about the Aleppo lapse in a brief follow-up interview that was broadcast on MSNBC and canceled some of his other scheduled interviews that had been planned for later in the day.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “I’m incredibly frustrated with myself,” Mr. Johnson said. “I have to get smarter and that’s just part of the process.”  He also released a statement, explaining that he is “human” and that as president he would surround himself with experts and receive daily security briefings to fill any gaps in his knowledge.  As for the impact the matter would have on his presidential prospects, Mr. Johnson said that would be up to the voters to decide. In a separate interview on ABC’s “The View” program, Mr. Johnson said that he was just trying to be as forthright about the situation as possible and made no excuses.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “For those who believe this is a disqualifier, so be it,” he said.
Photo  It was, in Gary Johnson’s own words, another “Aleppo moment.”  During a town hall-style interview on MSNBC on Wednesday night, Mr. Johnson, the Libertarian candidate for president, was asked by the host Chris Matthews to name his favorite foreign leader.  Mr. Johnson, appearing flustered, was at a loss to come up with a name.  He grasped at a former president of Mexico, Vicente Fox, who has been critical of Donald J. Trump, but was unable to remember his name without help — or the name of any sitting leader of a foreign country.  “I guess I’m having an Aleppo moment,” he said.  Mr. Johnson was referring to a remarkably similar episode earlier this month when, during another interview on MSNBC, he was asked how he would deal with the continuing situation in Aleppo, the ravaged Syrian city at the center of that country’s refugee crisis.  “What is Aleppo?” Mr. Johnson said at the time.  Mr. Matthews, who was interviewing Mr. Johnson and former Gov. William F. Weld of Massachusetts, his running mate, live at the University of New Hampshire, appeared to stall to give Mr. Johnson more time after the candidate repeated the initial question, looking slightly panicked.  “Any one of the continents, any country, name one foreign leader that you respect and look up to, anybody,” Mr. Matthews said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Johnson exhaled loudly.  “Mine was Shimon Peres,” Mr. Weld interjected.  Mr. Matthews clarified that he was looking for someone who was still alive. He then named various countries and continents — Canada, Mexico, Europe, Asia — in an apparent attempt to jog Mr. Johnson’s memory.  Mr. Johnson then made the “Aleppo moment” comment, indicating that he was having trouble coming up with Mr. Fox’s name.  “But I’m giving you the whole world!” Mr. Matthews shouted, interrupting him.  Mr. Weld eventually supplied Mr. Fox’s last name to Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Matthews, apparently having given up on the presidential candidate, asked the eager Mr. Weld to name his own favorite foreign leader, looking to conclude a painful exchange that felt significantly longer than the 50 seconds or so that it lasted.  Mr. Weld paused for half a second.  “Um, Merkel?” he said, referring to the German chancellor, Angela Merkel.  “Can’t argue with that,” Mr. Matthews said, as the crowd applauded.
Deporting all illegal immigrants had been his signature political issue for much of the presidential race, but his caustic tone and harsh approach has turned off many Republicans and independents, particularly women. His language was still fiery in Phoenix, yet he also said that the fate of most illegal immigrants would be handled humanely, and not right away.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “That discussion can only take place in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past, no longer with us, allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time,” Mr. Trump said, using the sort of vague phrasing that he once criticized.  Never had Mr. Trump gambled quite like this. Aiming to appear statesmanlike, he traveled to politically hostile territory to meet with a president who might have surprised him with a rebuke, and he also risked support from some conservatives who do not want him cozying up to Mexico or softening his immigration plans.  The trip to Mexico City was not without snags. Standing beside President Peña Nieto, Mr. Trump indicated that he had pulled a punch and chosen not to discuss his campaign promise to compel Mexico to pay for the wall. Yet Mr. Peña Nieto saw it somewhat differently, saying later on Twitter that at the start of their meeting, “I made it clear that Mexico will not pay for the wall.”  Mr. Peña Nieto did not dispute Mr. Trump at their news conference, however, and Mexican officials said that the two men did not dwell on the wall and that their meeting was conciliatory. Still, campaign advisers to Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, accused Mr. Trump of lying, and the Trump campaign issued a statement saying that the meeting was “not a negotiation” and that “it is unsurprising that they hold two different views on this issue.”  In Phoenix, Mr. Trump responded to Mr. Peña Nieto with the hectoring language that has long been part of his strategy to whip up his crowds.  “Mexico will pay for the wall, believe me — 100 percent — they don’t know it yet, but they will pay for the wall,” Mr. Trump said. “They’re great people, and great leaders, but they will pay for the wall.”  Mr. Trump had billed the Phoenix speech as a major address on immigration, and many Republican leaders and voters had hoped for more clarity about his positions. Mr. Trump outlined several steps that he would take to deport criminals and those who overstayed their visas and end so-called sanctuary cities, while saying that “the one route and only route” for others to obtain legal status would be “to return home and apply for re-entry.”  “We will treat everyone living or residing in our country with great dignity — so important,” Mr. Trump said, noting that the status of most illegal immigrants was no longer a “core issue” for him.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump also invited a group of Americans to the stage who, one by one, shared the names of relatives who they said were killed by illegal immigrants and insisted that only Mr. Trump could protect the country by securing its borders and moving swiftly to deport immigrants with criminal records.  Yet for all the fiery language and stagecraft, it was far from clear if Mr. Trump’s most ardent supporters would stick by him as he moves away from his original deportation-focused policy on immigration, or if he would win over many undecided voters with his new approach. But Mr. Trump went to great lengths to urge voters to view the presidential race as an epochal moment.  Photo  “We are in the middle of a jobs crisis, a border crisis, and a terrorism crisis,” he said. “This election is our last chance to secure the border, stop illegal immigration, and reform our laws to make your life better. This is it. We won’t get another opportunity – it will be too late.”  The whirlwind day started after Mr. Trump accepted an invitation from Mr. Peña Nieto to meet him at the presidential palace to discuss economic and border concerns. For the most part they managed to sidestep combustible issues and ignore raging hostility from average Mexicans. Mr. Trump has called them rapists and drug dealers, and he did not apologize for those remarks during a joint news conference when a reporter pressed him for any regrets.  Instead, as an impassive Mr. Peña Nieto looked on, Mr. Trump sounded conciliatory themes about working together to improve border security. Gone, at least for this foreign trip, were the threats about American interests and superiority that have defined Mr. Trump’s candidacy and electrified his supporters.  “I think it was an excellent meeting,” Mr. Trump said.  Mr. Peña Nieto, who pointedly emphasized goals like “mutual respect” and “constructive” relations several times in his remarks, did Mr. Trump some favors with his respectful treatment: The Mexican president acknowledged that every country had a “right” to protect its own border, and suggested that Mr. Trump wanted to move on from his antagonistic remarks of the past.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “The Mexican people felt aggrieved by those comments,” Mr. Peña Nieto said. “But I am certain that he has a genuine interest in building a relationship that would lead us to provide better conditions to our people.”  Mr. Trump’s unexpected trip to Mexico was timed to steer attention from his significant shifts on immigration policy. He flew to Mexico just hours before he was scheduled to deliver a major speech on immigration after more than a week of mixed signals about his immigration views, which he said were “softening” and then “hardening” in the space of two days last week.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On a more personal level, Mr. Trump also wanted to show undecided voters that he had the temperament and self-control of a statesman — qualities that many doubt he has — and also demonstrate that Americans did not need to worry every time he opened his mouth in a foreign country. He also hoped to show that he could acquit himself well on the world stage, something that is a clear strength of Mrs. Clinton, a former secretary of state, senator and first lady.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign has described Mr. Trump’s trip as a hollow gesture, but it was unclear whether Mrs. Clinton herself will deliver a more pointed critique of her opponent during his travels.  Mr. Trump, who has little experience with foreign policy statecraft or news conferences with heads of state, made no obvious mistakes during his trip to Mexico, nor did he breach any protocol during his public appearance with Mr. Peña Nieto on a small stage at the presidential palace. As Mr. Peña Nieto made lengthy opening remarks in Spanish, Mr. Trump clasped his hands at times, and tapped them against his thighs as he nodded slightly at other points as he listened to a woman beside him translate the remarks into English.  Mr. Peña Nieto came across as civil and stolid, defending the North American Free Trade Agreement — a frequent target of criticism by Mr. Trump — and noting that weak border security also allowed weapons and cash often to flow from the United States to Mexican gangs and drug cartels. But for the most part the president took a position of neutrality, neither chastising Mr. Trump nor indicating that he favored one American presidential candidate over another.  Yet Mr. Trump, who is known for insisting that only he can fix America’s problems, also suggested that he wanted Mexico to be a partner on border security.  “I really believe that the president and I will solve those problems,” Mr. Trump said. “We will get them solved. Illegal immigration is a problem for Mexico as well as for us. Drugs are a tremendous problem from Mexico as well as us. I mean it’s not a one-way street.”
This will be a little bit different. This won’t be a rally speech, per se. Instead, I’m going to deliver a detailed policy address on one of the greatest challenges facing our country today, illegal immigration.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  I’ve just landed having returned from a very important and special meeting with the president of Mexico, a man I like and respect very much. And a man who truly loves his country, Mexico.  And, by the way, just like I am a man who loves my country, the United States.  (APPLAUSE)  We agree on the importance of ending the illegal flow of drugs, cash, guns, and people across our border, and to put the cartels out of business.  (APPLAUSE)  We also discussed the great contributions of Mexican-American citizens to our two countries, my love for the people of Mexico, and the leadership and friendship between Mexico and the United States. It was a thoughtful and substantive conversation and it will go on for awhile. And, in the end we’re all going to win. Both countries, we’re all going to win.  This is the first of what I expect will be many, many conversations. And in a Trump administration we’re going to go about creating a new relationship between our two countries, but it’s going to be a fair relationship. We want fairness.  (APPLAUSE)  But to fix our immigration system, we must change our leadership in Washington and we must change it quickly. Sadly, sadly there is no other way. The truth is our immigration system is worse than anybody ever realized. But the facts aren’t known because the media won’t report on them. The politicians won’t talk about them and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up because they are making an absolute fortune. That’s the way it is.  Today, on a very complicated and very difficult subject, you will get the truth. The fundamental problem with the immigration system in our country is that it serves the needs of wealthy donors, political activists and powerful, powerful politicians. It’s all you can do. Thank you. Thank you.  (APPLAUSE)  Let me tell you who it does not serve. It does not serve you the American people. Doesn’t serve you. When politicians talk about immigration reform, they usually mean the following: amnesty, open borders, lower wages. Immigration reform should mean something else entirely. It should mean improvements to our laws and policies to make life better for American citizens.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you. But if we’re going to make our immigration system work, then we have to be prepared to talk honestly and without fear about these important and very sensitive issues. For instance, we have to listen to the concerns that working people, our forgotten working people, have over the record pace of immigration and it’s impact on their jobs, wages, housing, schools, tax bills and general living conditions.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  These are valid concerns expressed by decent and patriotic citizens from all backgrounds, all over. We also have to be honest about the fact that not everyone who seeks to join our country will be able to successfully assimilate. Sometimes it’s just not going to work out. It’s our right, as a sovereign nation, to chose immigrants that we think are the likeliest to thrive and flourish and love us.  (APPLAUSE)  Then there is the issue of security. Countless innocent American lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to secure our borders and enforce our laws like they have to be enforced. I have met with many of the great parents who lost their children to sanctuary cities and open borders. So many people, so many, many people. So sad. They will be joining me on this stage in a little while and I look forward to introducing, these are amazing, amazing people.  Countless Americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this administration and the administration that causes this horrible, horrible thought process, called Hillary Clinton.  (APPLAUSE)  This includes incredible Americans like 21-year-old Sarah Root. The man who killed her arrived at the border, entered federal custody and then was released into the U.S., think of it, into the U.S. community under the policies of the White House Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Weak, weak policies. Weak and foolish policies.  He was released again after the crime, and now he’s out there at large. Sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0, top student in her class one day before her death.  Also among the victims of the Obama-Clinton open-border policy was Grant Ronnebeck, a 21-year-old convenience store clerk and a really good guy from Mesa, Arizona. A lot of you have known about Grant.  He was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary, who had also been released from federal custody, and they knew it was going to happen again.  Another victim is Kate Steinle. Gunned down in the sanctuary city of San Francisco, by an illegal immigrant, deported five previous times. And they knew he was no good.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Then there is the case of 90-year-old Earl Olander, who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home, 90 years old and defenseless. The perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long, who did not meet Obama administration standards for removal. And they knew it was going to happen.  In California, a 64-year-old Air Force veteran, a great woman, according to everybody that knew her, Marilyn Pharis, was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer. Her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions but was never, ever deported, despite the fact that everybody wanted him out.  A 2011 report from the Government Accountability Office found that illegal immigrants and other non-citizens, in our prisons and jails together, had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names, 25,000.  On top of that, illegal immigration costs our country more than $113 billion a year. And this is what we get. For the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next 10 years, we could provide one million at-risk students with a school voucher, which so many people are wanting.  While there are many illegal immigrants in our country who are good people, many, many, this doesn’t change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower skilled workers with less education, who compete directly against vulnerable American workers, and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they can ever possibly pay back.  And they’re hurting a lot of our people that cannot get jobs under any circumstances.  But these facts are never reported. Instead, the media and my opponent discuss one thing and only one thing, the needs of people living here illegally. In many cases, by the way, they’re treated better than our vets.  Not going to happen anymore, folks. November 8th. Not going to happen anymore.  (APPLAUSE)  AUDIENCE: Trump! Trump! Trump!  The truth is, the central issue is not the needs of the 11 million illegal immigrants or however many there may be — and honestly we’ve been hearing that number for years. It’s always 11 million. Our government has no idea. It could be three million. It could be 30 million. They have no idea what the number is.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Frankly our government has no idea what they’re doing on many, many fronts, folks.  (APPLAUSE)  But whatever the number, that’s never really been the central issue. It will never be a central issue. It doesn’t matter from that standpoint. Anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally has simply spent too much time in Washington.  (APPLAUSE)  Only the out of touch media elites think the biggest problems facing America — you know this, this is what they talk about, facing American society today is that there are 11 million illegal immigrants who don’t have legal status. And, they also think the biggest thing, and you know this, it’s not nuclear, and it’s not ISIS, it’s not Russia, it’s not China, it’s global warming.  To all the politicians, donors, and special interests, hear these words from me and all of you today. There is only one core issue in the immigration debate, and that issue is the well being of the American people.  (APPLAUSE)  Nothing even comes a close second. Hillary Clinton, for instance, talks constantly about her fears that families will be separated, but she’s not talking about the American families who have been permanently separated from their loved ones because of a preventable homicide, because of a preventable death, because of murder.  No, she’s only talking about families who come here in violation of the law. We will treat everyone living or residing in our country with great dignity. So important.  We will be fair, just, and compassionate to all, but our greatest compassion must be for our American citizens.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you.  President Obama and Hillary Clinton have engaged in gross dereliction of duty by surrendering the safety of the American people to open borders, and you know it better than anybody right here in Arizona. You know it.  President Obama and Hillary Clinton support sanctuary cities. They support catch and release on the border. They support visa overstays. They support the release of dangerous, dangerous, dangerous, criminals from detention. And they support unconstitutional executive amnesty.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Hillary Clinton has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days, and her plan will provide Obamacare, Social Security, and Medicare for illegal immigrants, breaking the federal budget.  On top of that she promises uncontrolled, low-skilled immigration that continues to reduce jobs and wages for American workers, and especially for African-American and Hispanic workers within our country. Our citizens.  Most incredibly, because to me this is unbelievable, we have no idea who these people are, where they come from. I always say Trojan horse. Watch what’s going to happen, folks. It’s not going to be pretty.  This includes her plan to bring in 620,000 new refugees from Syria and that region over a short period of time. And even yesterday, when you were watching the news, you saw thousands and thousands of people coming in from Syria. What is wrong with our politicians, our leaders if we can call them that. What the hell are we doing?  (APPLAUSE)  Hard to believe. Hard to believe. Now that you’ve heard about Hillary Clinton’s plan, about which she has not answered a single question, let me tell you about my plan. And do you notice...  (APPLAUSE)  And do you notice all the time for weeks and weeks of debating my plan, debating, talking about it, what about this, what about that. They never even mentioned her plan on immigration because she doesn’t want to get into the quagmire. It’s a tough one, she doesn’t know what she’s doing except open borders and let everybody come in and destroy our country by the way.  (APPLAUSE)  While Hillary Clinton meets only with donors and lobbyists, my plan was crafted with the input from Federal Immigration offices, very great people. Among the top immigration experts anywhere in this country, who represent workers, not corporations, very important to us.  I also worked with lawmakers, who’ve led on this issue on behalf of American citizens for many years. And most importantly I’ve met with the people directly impacted by these policies. So important.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Number one, are you ready? Are you ready?  (APPLAUSE)  We will build a great wall along the southern border.  (APPLAUSE)  AUDIENCE: Build the wall! Build the wall! Build the wall!  And Mexico will pay for the wall.  (APPLAUSE)  One hundred percent. They don’t know it yet, but they’re going to pay for it. And they’re great people and great leaders but they’re going to pay for the wall.  On day one, we will begin working on an impenetrable, physical, tall, power, beautiful southern border wall.  (APPLAUSE)  We will use the best technology, including above and below ground sensors that’s the tunnels. Remember that, above and below.  (APPLAUSE)  Above and below ground sensors. Towers, aerial surveillance and manpower to supplement the wall, find and dislocate tunnels and keep out criminal cartels and Mexico you know that, will work with us. I really believe it. Mexico will work with us. I absolutely believe it. And especially after meeting with their wonderful, wonderful president today. I really believe they want to solve this problem along with us, and I’m sure they will.  (APPLAUSE)  Number two, we are going to end catch and release. We catch them, oh go ahead. We catch them, go ahead.  (APPLAUSE)  Under my administration, anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country and back to the country from which they came.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  And they’ll be brought great distances. We’re not dropping them right across. They learned that. President Eisenhower. They’d drop them across, right across, and they’d come back. And across.  Then when they flew them to a long distance, all of a sudden that was the end. We will take them great distances. But we will take them to the country where they came from, O.K.?  Number three. Number three, this is the one, I think it’s so great. It’s hard to believe, people don’t even talk about it. Zero tolerance for criminal aliens. Zero. Zero.  (APPLAUSE)  Zero. They don’t come in here. They don’t come in here.  According to federal data, there are at least two million, two million, think of it, criminal aliens now inside of our country, two million people criminal aliens. We will begin moving them out day one. As soon as I take office. Day one. In joint operation with local, state, and federal law enforcement.  Now, just so you understand, the police, who we all respect — say hello to the police. Boy, they don’t get the credit they deserve. I can tell you. They’re great people. But the police and law enforcement, they know who these people are.  They live with these people. They get mocked by these people. They can’t do anything about these people, and they want to. They know who these people are. Day one, my first hour in office, those people are gone.  (APPLAUSE)  And you can call it deported if you want. The press doesn’t like that term. You can call it whatever the hell you want. They’re gone.  Beyond the two million, and there are vast numbers of additional criminal illegal immigrants who have fled, but their days have run out in this country. The crime will stop. They’re going to be gone. It will be over.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  They’re going out. They’re going out fast.  Moving forward. We will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever, and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings if we even have to do that.  We will terminate the Obama administration’s deadly, and it is deadly, non-enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets, walk around, do whatever they want to do, crime all over the place.  That’s over. That’s over, folks. That’s over.  Since 2013 alone, the Obama administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into United States communities. These are individuals encountered or identified by ICE, but who were not detained or processed for deportation because it wouldn’t have been politically correct.  My plan also includes cooperating closely with local jurisdictions to remove criminal aliens immediately. We will restore the highly successful Secure Communities Program. Good program. We will expand and revitalize the popular 287(g) partnerships, which will help to identify hundreds of thousands of deportable aliens in local jails that we don’t even know about.  Both of these programs have been recklessly gutted by this administration. And those were programs that worked.  This is yet one more area where we are headed in a totally opposite direction. There’s no common sense, there’s no brain power in our administration by our leader, or our leaders. None, none, none.  On my first day in office I am also going to ask Congress to pass Kate’s Law, named for Kate Steinle...  (APPLAUSE)  ... to ensure that criminal aliens convicted of illegal reentry receive strong mandatory minimum sentences. Strong.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  And then we get them out.  Another reform I’m proposing is the passage of legislation named for Detective Michael Davis and Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver, two law enforcement officers recently killed by a previously deported illegal immigrant.  The Davis-Oliver bill will enhance cooperation with state and local authorities to ensure that criminal immigrants and terrorists are swiftly, really swiftly, identified and removed. And they will go face, believe me. They’re going to go.  We’re going to triple the number of ICE deportation officers.  (APPLAUSE)  Within ICE I am going to create a new special deportation task force focused on identifying and quickly removing the most dangerous criminal illegal immigrants in America who have evaded justice just like Hillary Clinton has evaded justice, O.K.?  (APPLAUSE)  Maybe they’ll be able to deport her.  (APPLAUSE)  The local police who know every one of these criminals, and they know each and every one by name, by crime, where they live, they will work so fast. And our local police will be so happy that they don’t have to be abused by these thugs anymore.  There’s no great mystery to it, they’ve put up with it for years, and now finally we will turn the tables and law enforcement and our police will be allowed to clear up this dangerous and threatening mess.  We’re also going to hire 5,000 more Border Patrol agents.  (APPLAUSE)  Who gave me their endorsement, 16,500 gave me their endorsement.  And put more of them on the border instead of behind desks which is good. We will expand the number of border patrol stations significantly.  I’ve had a chance to spend time with these incredible law enforcement officers, and I want to take a moment to thank them. What they do is incredible.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  And getting their endorsement means so much to me. More to me really than I can say. Means so much. First time they’ve ever endorsed a presidential candidate.  Number four, block funding for sanctuary cities. We block the funding. No more funds.  (APPLAUSE)  We will end the sanctuary cities that have resulted in so many needless deaths. Cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars, and we will work with Congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities. Number five, cancel unconstitutional executive orders and enforce all immigration laws.  (APPLAUSE)  We will immediately terminate President Obama’s two illegal executive amnesties in which he defied federal law and the Constitution to give amnesty to approximately five million illegal immigrants, five million.  (BOOING)  And how about all the millions that are waiting on line, going through the process legally? So unfair.  Hillary Clinton has pledged to keep both of these illegal amnesty programs, including the 2014 amnesty which has been blocked by the United States Supreme Court. Great.  Clinton has also pledged to add a third executive amnesty. And by the way, folks, she will be a disaster for our country, a disaster in so many other ways.  And don’t forget the Supreme Court of the United States. Don’t forget that when you go to vote on November 8. And don’t forget your Second Amendment. And don’t forget the repeal and replacement of Obamacare.  (APPLAUSE)  And don’t forget building up our depleted military. And don’t forget taking care of our vets. Don’t forget our vets. They have been forgotten.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  Clinton’s plan would trigger a constitutional crisis unlike almost anything we have ever seen before. In effect, she would be abolishing the lawmaking powers of Congress in order to write her own laws from the Oval Office. And you see what bad judgment she has. She has seriously bad judgment.  (BOOING)  Can you imagine? In a Trump administration all immigration laws will be enforced, will be enforced. As with any law enforcement activity, we will set priorities. But unlike this administration, no one will be immune or exempt from enforcement. And ICE and Border Patrol officers will be allowed to do their jobs the way their jobs are supposed to be done.  (APPLAUSE)  Anyone who has entered the United States illegally is subject to deportation. That is what it means to have laws and to have a country. Otherwise we don’t have a country.  Our enforcement priorities will include removing criminals, gang members, security threats, visa overstays, public charges. That is those relying on public welfare or straining the safety net along with millions of recent illegal arrivals and overstays who’ve come here under this current corrupt administration.  (APPLAUSE)  Number six, we are going to suspend the issuance of visas to any place where adequate screening cannot occur.  (APPLAUSE)  According to data provided by the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration, and the national interest between 9/11 and the end of 2014, at least 380 foreign born individuals were convicted in terror cases inside the United States. And even right now the largest number of people are under investigation for exactly this that we’ve ever had in the history of our country.  Our country is a mess. We don’t even know what to look for anymore, folks. Our country has to straighten out. And we have to straighten out fast.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The number is likely higher. But the administration refuses to provide this information, even to Congress. As soon as I enter office I am going to ask the Department of State, which has been brutalized by Hillary Clinton, brutalized.  (BOOING)  Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to begin a comprehensive review of these cases in order to develop a list of regions and countries from which immigration must be suspended until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put in place.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  I call it extreme vetting right? Extreme vetting. I want extreme. It’s going to be so tough, and if somebody comes in that’s fine but they’re going to be good. It’s extreme.  And if people don’t like it, we’ve got have a country folks. Got to have a country. Countries in which immigration will be suspended would include places like Syria and Libya. And we are going to stop the tens of thousands of people coming in from Syria. We have no idea who they are, where they come from. There’s no documentation. There’s no paperwork. It’s going to end badly folks. It’s going to end very, very badly.  For the price of resettling one refugee in the United States, 12 could be resettled in a safe zone in their home region. Which I agree with 100 percent. We have to build safe zones and we’ll get the money from Gulf states. We don’t want to put up the money. We owe almost $20 trillion. Doubled since Obama took office, our national debt.  But we will get the money from Gulf states and others. We’ll supervise it. We’ll build safe zones which is something that I think all of us want to see.  Another reform involves new screening tests for all applicants that include, and this is so important, especially if you get the right people. And we will get the right people. An ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you. We’re very proud of our country. Aren’t we? Really? With all it’s going through, we’re very proud of our country. For instance, in the last five years, we’ve admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from Iraq and Afghanistan. And these two countries according to Pew Research, a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified. That’s what they say.  (APPLAUSE)  That’s what they say. They’re justified. Right? And we’re admitting them to our country. Applicants will be asked their views about honor killings, about respect for women and gays and minorities. Attitudes on radical Islam, which our president refuses to say and many other topics as part of this vetting procedure. And if we have the right people doing it, believe me, very, very few will slip through the cracks. Hopefully, none.  (APPLAUSE)  Number seven, we will insure that other countries take their people back when they order them deported.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  There are at least 23 countries that refuse to take their people back after they’ve been ordered to leave the United States. Including large numbers of violent criminals, they won’t take them back. So we say, O.K., we’ll keep them. Not going to happen with me, not going to happen with me.  (APPLAUSE)  Due to a Supreme Court decision, if these violent offenders cannot be sent home, our law enforcement officers have to release them into your communities.  (APPLAUSE)  And by the way, the results are horrific, horrific. There are often terrible consequences, such as Casey Chadwick’s tragic death in Connecticut just last year. Yet despite the existence of a law that commands the secretary of state to stop issuing visas to these countries.  Secretary Hillary Clinton ignored this law and refused to use this powerful tool to bring nations into compliance. And, they would comply if we would act properly.  In other words, if we had leaders that knew what they were doing, which we don’t.  The result of her misconduct was the release of thousands and thousands of dangerous criminal aliens who should have been sent home to their countries. Instead we have them all over the place. Probably a couple in this room as a matter of fact, but I hope not.  According to a report for the Boston Globe from the year 2008 to 2014 nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into U.S. communities because their home countries would not, under any circumstances, take them back. Hard to believe with the power we have. Hard to believe.  We’re like the big bully that keeps getting beat up. You ever see that? The big bully that keeps getting beat up.  These 13,000 releases occurred on Hillary Clinton’s watch. She had the power and the duty to stop it cold, and she decided she would not do it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (BOOING)  And Arizona knows better than most exactly what I’m talking about.  (APPLAUSE)  Those released include individuals convicted of killings, sexual assaults, and some of the most heinous crimes imaginable.  The Boston Globe writes that a Globe review of 323 criminals released in New England from 2008 to 2012 found that as many as 30 percent committed new offenses, including rape, attempted murder, and child molestation. We take them, we take them.  (BOOING)  Number eight, we will finally complete the biometric entry-exit visa tracking system which we need desperately.  (APPLAUSE)  For years Congress has required biometric entry-exit visa tracking systems, but it has never been completed. The politicians are all talk, no action, never happens. Never happens.  Hillary Clinton, all talk. Unfortunately when there is action it’s always the wrong decision. You ever notice?  In my administration we will ensure that this system is in place. And, I will tell you, it will be on land, it will be on sea, it will be in air. We will have a proper tracking system.  Approximately half of new illegal immigrants came on temporary visas and then never, ever left. Why should they? Nobody’s telling them to leave. Stay as long as you want, we’ll take care of you.  Beyond violating our laws, visa overstays pose — and they really are a big problem — pose a substantial threat to national security. The 9/11 Commission said that this tracking system should be a high priority and would have assisted law enforcement and intelligence officials in August and September 2001 in conducting a search for two of the 9/11 hijackers that were in the United States on expired visas.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And you know what that would have meant, what that could have meant. Wouldn’t that have been wonderful, right? What that could have meant.  Last year alone nearly half a million individuals overstayed their temporary visas. Removing these overstays will be a top priority of my administration.  (APPLAUSE)  If people around the world believe they can just come on a temporary visa and never, ever leave, the Obama-Clinton policy, that’s what it is, then we have a completely open border, and we no longer have a country.  We must send a message that visa expiration dates will be strongly enforced.  Number nine, we will turn off the jobs and benefits magnet.  (APPLAUSE)  We will ensure that E-Verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law, and we will work with Congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country.  Immigration law doesn’t exist for the purpose of keeping criminals out. It exists to protect all aspects of American life. The work site, the welfare office, the education system, and everything else.  That is why immigration limits are established in the first place. If we only enforced the laws against crime, then we have an open border to the entire world. We will enforce all of our immigration laws.  (APPLAUSE)  And the same goes for government benefits. The Center for Immigration Studies estimates that 62 percent of households headed by illegal immigrants use some form of cash or non-cash welfare programs like food stamps or housing assistance.  Tremendous costs, by the way, to our country. Tremendous costs. This directly violates the federal public charge law designed to protect the United States Treasury. Those who abuse our welfare system will be priorities for immediate removal.  (APPLAUSE)  Number 10, we will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of America and its workers, the forgotten people. Workers. We’re going to take care of our workers.  And by the way, and by the way, we’re going to make great trade deals. We’re going to renegotiate trade deals. We’re going to bring our jobs back home. We’re going to bring our jobs back home.  We have the most incompetently worked trade deals ever negotiated probably in the history of the world, and that starts with Nafta. And now they want to go TPP, one of the great disasters.  We’re going to bring our jobs back home. And if companies want to leave Arizona and if they want to leave other states, there’s going to be a lot of trouble for them. It’s not going to be so easy. There will be consequence. Remember that. There will be consequence. They’re not going to be leaving, go to another country, make the product, sell it into the United States, and all we end up with is no taxes and total unemployment. It’s not going to happen. There will be consequences.  (APPLAUSE)  We’ve admitted 59 million immigrants to the United States between 1965 and 2015. Many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country. So true. But we now have an obligation to them and to their children to control future immigration as we are following, if you think, previous immigration waves.  We’ve had some big waves. And tremendously positive things have happened. Incredible things have happened. To ensure assimilation we want to ensure that it works. Assimilation, an important word. Integration and upward mobility.  (APPLAUSE)  Within just a few years immigration as a share of national population is set to break all historical records. The time has come for a new immigration commission to develop a new set of reforms to our legal immigration system in order to achieve the following goals.  To keep immigration levels measured by population share within historical norms. To select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in U.S. society and their ability to be financially self- sufficient.  (APPLAUSE)  We take anybody. Come on in, anybody. Just come on in. Not anymore.  You know, folks, it’s called a two-way street. It is a two-way street, right? We need a system that serves our needs, not the needs of others. Remember, under a Trump administration it’s called America first. Remember that.  (APPLAUSE)  To choose immigrants based on merit. Merit, skill, and proficiency. Doesn’t that sound nice? And to establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to American workers first. And that in particular African-American and Latino workers who are being shut out in this process so unfairly.  (APPLAUSE)  And Hillary Clinton is going to do nothing for the African-American worker, the Latino worker. She’s going to do nothing. Give me your vote, she says, on November 8th. And then she’ll say, so long, see you in four years. That’s what it is.  She is going to do nothing. And just look at the past. She’s done nothing. She’s been there for 35 years. She’s done nothing. And I say what do you have to lose? Choose me. Watch how good we’re going to do together. Watch.  (APPLAUSE)  You watch. We want people to come into our country, but they have to come into our country legally and properly vetted, and in a manner that serves the national interest. We’ve been living under outdated immigration rules from decades ago. They’re decades and decades old.  To avoid this happening in the future, I believe we should sunset our visa laws so that Congress is forced to periodically revise and revisit them to bring them up to date. They’re archaic. They’re ancient. We wouldn’t put our entire federal budget on auto pilot for decades, so why should we do the same for the very, very complex subject of immigration?  So let’s now talk about the big picture. These 10 steps, if rigorously followed and enforced, will accomplish more in a matter of months than our politicians have accomplished on this issue in the last 50 years. It’s going to happen, folks. Because I am proudly not a politician, because I am not behold to any special interest, I’ve spent a lot of money on my campaign, I’ll tell you. I write those checks. Nobody owns Trump.  I will get this done for you and for your family. We’ll do it right. You’ll be proud of our country again. We’ll do it right. We will accomplish all of the steps outlined above. And, when we do, peace and law and justice and prosperity will prevail. Crime will go down. Border crossings will plummet. Gangs will disappear.  And the gangs are all over the place. And welfare use will decrease. We will have a peace dividend to spend on rebuilding America, beginning with our American inner cities. We’re going to rebuild them, for once and for all.  For those here illegally today, who are seeking legal status, they will have one route and one route only. To return home and apply for reentry like everybody else, under the rules of the new legal immigration system that I have outlined above. Those who have left to seek entry —  Thank you.  Thank you. Thank you. Those who have left to seek entry under this new system — and it will be an efficient system — will not be awarded surplus visas, but will have to apply for entry under the immigration caps or limits that will be established in the future.TRUMP: We will break the cycle of amnesty and illegal immigration. We will break the cycle. There will be no amnesty.  (APPLAUSE)  Our message to the world will be this. You cannot obtain legal status or become a citizen of the United States by illegally entering our country. Can’t do it.  (APPLAUSE)  This declaration alone will help stop the crisis of illegal crossings and illegal overstays, very importantly. People will know that you can’t just smuggle in, hunker down and wait to be legalized. It’s not going to work that way. Those days are over.  (APPLAUSE)  Importantly, in several years when we have accomplished all of our enforcement and deportation goals and truly ended illegal immigration for good, including the construction of a great wall, which we will have built in record time. And at a reasonable cost, which you never hear from the government.  (APPLAUSE)  And the establishment of our new lawful immigration system then and only then will we be in a position to consider the appropriate disposition of those individuals who remain.  That discussion can take place only in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past, no longer with us, allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time.  (APPLAUSE)  Right now, however, we’re in the middle of a jobs crisis, a border crisis and a terrorism crisis like never before. All energies of the federal government and the legislative process must now be focused on immigration security. That is the only conversation we should be having at this time, immigration security. Cut it off.  Whether it’s dangerous materials being smuggled across the border, terrorists entering on visas or Americans losing their jobs to foreign workers, these are the problems we must now focus on fixing. And the media needs to begin demanding to hear Hillary Clinton’s answer on how her policies will affect Americans and their security.  (APPLAUSE)  These are matters of life and death for our country and its people, and we deserve answers from Hillary Clinton. And do you notice, she doesn’t answer.  She didn’t go to Louisiana. She didn’t go to Mexico. She was invited.  She doesn’t have the strength or the stamina to make America great again. Believe me.  (APPLAUSE)  What we do know, despite the lack of media curiosity, is that Hillary Clinton promises a radical amnesty combined with a radical reduction in immigration enforcement. Just ask the Border Patrol about Hillary Clinton. You won’t like what you’re hearing.  The result will be millions more illegal immigrants; thousands of more violent, horrible crimes; and total chaos and lawlessness. That’s what’s going to happen, as sure as you’re standing there.  This election, and I believe this, is our last chance to secure the border, stop illegal immigration and reform our laws to make your life better. I really believe this is it. This is our last time. November 8. November 8. You got to get out and vote on November 8.  (APPLAUSE)  It’s our last chance. It’s our last chance. And that includes Supreme Court justices and Second Amendment. Remember that. So I want to remind everyone what we’re fighting for and who we are fighting for.  I am going to ask — these are really special people that I’ve gotten to know. I’m going to ask all of the “Angel Moms” to come join me on the stage right now.  These are amazing women.  (APPLAUSE)  These are amazing people.  (APPLAUSE)  AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!  I’ve become friends with so many. But Jamiel Shaw, incredible guy, lost his son so violently. Say just a few words about your child.  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My son Ronald da Silva (ph) was murdered April 27, 2002 by an illegal alien who had been previously deported. And what so — makes me so outrageous is that we came here legally.  Thank you, Mr. Trump. I totally support you. You have my vote.  TRUMP: Thank you, thank you.  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): God bless you.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: You know what? Name your child and come right by. Go ahead.  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Laura Wilkerson. And my son was Joshua Wilkerson. He was murdered by an illegal in 2010. And I personally support Mr. Trump for our next president.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My name is Ruth Johnston Martin (ph). My husband was shot by an illegal alien. He fought the good fight but he took his last breath in 2002. And I support this man who’s going to change this country for the better. God bless you.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My name Maureen Maloney (ph), and our son Matthew Denise (ph) was 23 years old when he was dragged a quarter of a mile to his death by an illegal alien, while horrified witnesses were banging on the truck trying to stop him.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Our son Matthew Denise, if Donald Trump were president in 2011, our son Matthew Denise and other Americans would be alive today.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Thank you. My name is Kathy Woods (ph). My son Steve (ph), a high school senior, 17 years old, went to the beach after a high school football game. A local gang came along, nine members. The cars were battered to — like war in Beirut. And all I can say is they murdered him and if Mr. Trump had been in office then the border would have been secure and our children would not be dead today.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): Hi. My name is Brenda Sparks (ph), and my son is named Eric Zapeda (ph). He was raised by a legal immigrant from Honduras only to be murdered by an illegal in 2011. His murderer never did a second in handcuffs or jail. Got away with killing an American. So I’m voting for trump. And by the way, so is my mother.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): My name is Dee Angle (ph). My cousin Rebecca Ann Johnston (ph), known as Becky, was murdered on January the 1st, 1989 in North Little Rock, Arkansas. Thank you. And if you don’t vote Trump, we won’t have a country. Trump all the way.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): I’m Shannon Estes (ph). And my daughter Shaley Estes (ph), 22 years old, was murdered here in Phoenix last July 24 by a Russian who overstayed his visa. And vote Trump.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): I’m Mary Ann Mendoza, the mother of Sergeant Brandon Mendoza, who was killed in a violent head-on collision in Mesa.  Thank you.  I want to thank Phoenix for the support you’ve always given me, and I want to tell you what. I’m supporting the man who will — who is the only man who is going to save our country, and what we our going to be leaving our children.  (APPLAUSE)  (SPEAKER’S VOICE): I’m Steve Ronnebeck, father of Grant Ronnebeck, 21 years old. Killed January 22, 2015 by an illegal immigrant who shot him in the face. I truly believe that Mr. Trump is going to change things. He’s going to fight for my family, and he’s going to fight for America.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: These are amazing people, and I am not asking for their endorsement, believe me that. I just think I’ve gotten to know so many of them, and many more, from our group. But they are incredible people and what they’re going through is incredible, and there’s just no reason for it. Let’s give them a really tremendous hand.  (APPLAUSE)  That’s tough stuff, I will tell you. That is tough stuff. Incredible people.  So, now is the time for these voices to be heard. Now is the time for the media to begin asking questions on their behalf. Now is the time for all of us as one country, Democrat, Republican, liberal, conservative to band together to deliver justice, and safety, and security for all Americans.  Let’s fix this horrible, horrible, problem. It can be fixed quickly. Let’s our secure our border.  (APPLAUSE)  Let’s stop the drugs and the crime from pouring into our country. Let’s protect our social security and Medicare. Let’s get unemployed Americans off the welfare and back to work in their own country.  This has been an incredible evening. We’re going to remember this evening. November 8, we have to get everybody. This is such an important state. November 8 we have to get everybody to go out and vote.  We’re going to bring — thank you, thank you. We’re going to take our country back, folks. This is a movement. We’re going to take our country back.  Thank you.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you.  This is an incredible movement. The world is talking about it. The world is talking about it and by the way, if you haven’t been looking to what’s been happening at the polls over the last three or four days I think you should start looking. You should start looking.  (APPLAUSE)  Together we can save American lives, American jobs, and American futures. Together we can save America itself. Join me in this mission, we’re going to make America great again.  Thank you. I love you. God bless you, everybody. God bless you. God bless you, thank you.
• Stop issuing visas to any country where “adequate screening cannot occur” that might endanger national security;.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • Ensure foreign countries take back deported immigrants from the United States (Mr. Trump said 23 countries refuse to do so).  • Complete a biometric entry and exit visa tracking system under development. “It will be on land, it will be on sea, it will be in the air,” he said.  And the other highlights from his speech:  • Mr. Trump made the case that Washington elites and the media have put the focus, wrongly, on the plight of an estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants in the country, rather than the Americans impacted by their presence.  “Anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally has simply spent too much time in Washington. Only the out of touch media elites think the biggest problems facing American society today is that there are 11 illegal immigrants who don’t have legal status.”  • Trump ticked through the names of three Americans who were killed by undocumented immigrants. These are staples of his speeches and familiar to his audiences at this stage of the campaign. He has held them up as examples of an immigration system run amok with tragic consequences.  • Comparing himself to Hillary Clinton, who he maligned throughout the speech, Mr. Trump asked: “What do you have to lose? Choose me.” It was an echo of a much mocked question he asked black voters recently.  • “Maybe they’ll be able to deport her.” Mr. Trump wondered provocatively, whether it’s possible to send Mrs. Clinton out of the country.  • A memorable passage from this speech: “Our message to the world will be this: You cannot obtain legal status or become a citizen of the United States by illegally entering our country. Can’t do it. This declaration alone will stop the crisis of illegal crossing. You can’t just smuggle in, hunker down and wait to be legalized. Those days are over.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  • Mr. Trump invited onto the stage the mothers and fathers of Americans whose children were killed by undocumented immigrants. He asked each to describe their children and how they died. He then kissed many of them on the cheek. It was the most emotional moment of the speech. “If you don’t vote Trump, we won’t have a country,” one of the mother told the audience.  Here are the highlights from Mr. Trump’s trip to Mexico: He reached out to the Mexican president and people.  Mr. Trump, first reading slowly from a statement and then speaking more freely in response to a question, said he now considered Mr. Peña Nieto a friend and heaped praise on Americans of Mexican descent. Mexican-Americans, Mr. Trump said, were “beyond reproach” and “spectacular, hard-working people.”  But Mr. Trump said he also told Mr. Peña Nieto directly that he felt Mexico had benefited disproportionately from its trade agreements with the United States, and that he had described illegal immigration as a problem for both countries.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  He raised his plan to build a wall, but there’s a dispute over whether he and Mr. Peña Nieto discussed who would pay for it.  Mr. Trump said the two did not discuss the issue of forcing Mexico to pay for a border wall — one of the signature promises of his campaign. Mr. Peña Nieto did not challenge the idea during the news conference but later posted on Twitter that, during his meeting with Mr. Trump, he had made it clear that Mexico wouldn’t pay for the wall.  Mr. Peña Nieto pressed Mr. Trump on his contentious comments and pushed back against his assertions on trade.  Mr. Peña Nieto pushed back in the gentlest of terms on several of Mr. Trump’s claims on Nafta, citing U.S. Chamber of Commerce statistics to argue that free trade had been beneficial for both countries and stressing the economic importance of easy movement across the border.  Without mentioning specific remarks by Mr. Trump, Mexico’s president said that hurtful comments had been made. “Mexican nationals in the United States are honest people, working people,” he said, adding, “Mexicans deserve everybody’s respect.”  But Mr. Peña Nieto stopped well short of scolding Mr. Trump on the international stage. On the contrary, he expressed optimism that they could work together if Mr. Trump was elected president, “even though we do not agree on everything.”  Video  Despite a call on social media for anti-Trump protesters, the turnout at one rally was underwhelming.  The showing was something of a surprise, considering the sense of betrayal among many Mexicans, who feel that their president sold them out to the worst possible person.  By the start time of 11 a.m., there were dozens of journalist but only a few protesters. A half-hour later, the number of protesters — at least those being vocal and carrying anti-Trump signs — seemed stuck at four, including a guy wearing a Mexican wrestling mask, while the number of journalists topped 50. By 12:30 p.m., there were no more than 10 demonstrators, while the journalist pack continued to balloon.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Still, the protesters did their best to represent the anger and disappointment that many Mexicans have expressed toward Mr. Trump as well as toward Mr. Peña Nieto, who is struggling with low approval ratings and a string of scandals. He has spoken out sharply against Mr. Trump in the past, saying in a television interview last month that there was “no way” Mexico would pay for a border wall, and earlier comparing Mr. Trump’s campaign to the rise of Hitler.  “The president didn’t represent the Mexican people, he didn’t consult with us,” said the demonstrator in the wrestling mask, who called himself “Maldito Perro” — Damned Dog — though later said his real name was Diego Garcia.  He admitted to being disappointed by the anemic turnout. Social media activity, he lamented, seemed to be replacing the time-honored tradition of the street protest.
NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser.
Video  Donald J. Trump will visit Mexico on Wednesday for a private meeting with President Enrique Peña Nieto — a trip that will take him to a nation he has repeatedly scorned — before quickly flying back for what is billed as a major immigration speech in Arizona.  Mr. Peña Nieto’s office said Tuesday night that the meeting would take place at the presidential palace in Mexico City, and Mr. Trump, on Twitter, said he looked “very much forward” to the visit.  The Mexican president’s office said Mr. Peña Nieto had sent invitations last week to both Mr. Trump and Hillary Clinton. The negotiations for both trips were first reported by The Washington Post.  The Clinton campaign said Mrs. Clinton last met with the Mexican president in 2014 and would talk again with him “at the appropriate time,” without elaborating.  Mr. Peña Nieto is reaching out to Mr. Trump in the face of the Republican candidate’s antagonistic attitude toward Mexico in his policies and campaign rallies. He has said many Mexican immigrants who enter the United States illegally are rapists, and he has repeatedly insisted that Mexico will pay for his proposed wall along the southern United States border.  He is widely reviled in Mexico, where the wall proposal has revived deep grievances over sovereignty and respect that have historically dogged Mexico’s relationship with the United States.  “They are not our friend, believe me,” Mr. Trump said in a speech last year in which he accused Mexico of treating the United States unfairly, “but they are killing us economically.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “When Mexico sends its people, they’re not sending their best,” he added. “They’re bringing drugs, they’re bringing crime. They’re rapists, and some I assume are good people.”  Politicians in Mexico have largely remained silent on Mr. Trump, though there have been outbursts, including from Mr. Peña Nieto himself. In March, he compared Mr. Trump to Hitler and Mussolini for what he called Mr. Trump’s strident remarks and populism, though he later tried to soften his words without quite taking them back.  The trip will take place hours before Mr. Trump is to give a speech in Phoenix that is expected to clarify his stance on immigration, which has plagued his campaign over the past few weeks as he has wavered on key elements of his platform. His campaign has given conflicting signals over whether he will stick to the hard-line positions he took during the Republican primaries, particularly on deportations, and he suggested recently that he was open to “softening” some of his proposals. But his calls to have Mexico pay for the wall have continued.  “From the first days of his campaign, Donald Trump has painted Mexicans as ‘rapists’ and criminals and has promised to deport 16 million people, including children and U.S. citizens,” Jennifer Palmieri, the Clinton campaign’s communications director, said in a statement. “What ultimately matters is what Donald Trump says to voters in Arizona, not Mexico, and whether he remains committed to the splitting up of families and deportation of millions.”  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The trip is the latest gamble for Mr. Trump and his struggling campaign. But for all the risk it poses, it offers an image Mr. Trump relishes: of a wily negotiator willing to do the unexpected — meeting with a perceived enemy — to advance his agenda.  It will also be his first official meeting with a head of state as the Republican presidential nominee.  Despite Mr. Trump’s routine scolding of Mexico and its leadership, several of his closest allies have warm ties with the country and its president. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a top Trump adviser and confidant, traveled to Mexico in 2014 to meet with Mr. Peña Nieto, arguing that it was imperative for the United States to put Mexico at the center of its foreign relations.  During that trip, Mr. Christie offered lavish praise for Mr. Peña Nieto’s market-oriented policies and, unlike Mr. Trump, spoke of the need to cultivate stronger ties with Mexico.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Too often, our neighbors in Mexico and Canada have felt that they were an afterthought in U.S. foreign policy,” he said. “My view is that they should be our first thought.”  A person briefed on the trip discussions said that Mr. Christie, who leads Mr. Trump’s transition team, had helped with them.  Photo  Mexico’s disaffection with Mr. Trump began early in his campaign, when he said, among other things, that the immigrants entering the United States illegally from Mexico were criminals. From that point on, columns, articles and public forums have been filled with anti-Trump tirades, his words galvanizing Mexicans across the social spectrum.  Artisans have fashioned Trump piñatas, and former President Vicente Fox has made it his mission to rebuke Mr. Trump’s every word, to name but two of the rejoinders from Mexican society. Last year, writers, intellectuals and scientists from across the Spanish-speaking world wrote a public letter denouncing Mr. Trump and accusing him of xenophobia.  Mr. Peña Nieto’s finance minister has said that under no circumstances would Mexico pay for a border wall.  Andrew Selee, the executive vice president of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and a Mexico expert, said Mexico’s motivation to invite Mr. Trump might simply have been pragmatic.  “I think the Mexican government wants channels with whoever is going to be president of the U.S. next, and Trump is a legitimate candidate,” Mr. Selee said. “And from a political perspective, Peña Nieto getting Trump to come to Mexico shows that Trump has been forced to shift some of his rhetoric and take Mexico seriously.”  But considering how often Mr. Trump comes up in conversation in Mexico, and the uniform insult felt by the nation every time he talks about the wall, the government has remained disciplined in their public statements. That is in part a political decision: Officials feel that any responses will do little but provide more publicity for the candidate.  For Mr. Peña Nieto, though, the politics could be difficult. His poll numbers are the lowest of any Mexican president in a quarter-century.
But Mr. Trump, as he has demonstrated time and again, has little regard for the conventions of politics. And he is plainly angry that Mr. Ryan continues to criticize him for his inflammatory remarks. On Tuesday, Mr. Trump said “I’m just not quite there yet” when asked in an interview with The Washington Post if he was supporting Mr. Ryan’s re-election.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s choice of words sounded familiar: In May, Mr. Ryan said he was “not ready” to endorse Mr. Trump for president (the speaker subsequently did.)  In a phone conversation between Mr. Pence and Mr. Trump on Wednesday morning, according to someone with knowledge of the call, Mr. Trump brought up his Washington Post interview. Mr. Pence, who served in the House with Mr. Ryan, said that while he understood where Mr. Trump was coming from, he personally was inclined to support Mr. Ryan. Mr. Trump agreed that he should.  But it was not just Mr. Trump’s rebuff of Mr. Ryan that was causing difficulties for Mr. Pence: The Republican vice-presidential nominee also happened to be meeting in Arizona on Tuesday night with Senator John McCain, just hours after Mr. Trump said in the same Washington Post interview that he also was not ready to endorse Mr. McCain’s campaign.  Mr. McCain was cordial but direct with Mr. Pence, according to a Republican briefed on the meeting, making clear that he hoped the Indiana governor could help rein in Mr. Trump.  Yet it was Mr. Trump’s slight of Mr. Ryan that was most exasperating to party officials.  The speaker is facing a primary challenge in Wisconsin on Tuesday from a businessman, Paul Nehlen, who is running on a populist platform similar to Mr. Trump’s. Mr. Nehlen came to Mr. Trump’s defense this week after Mr. Ryan implicitly criticized the Republican nominee for ridiculing the Muslim parents of an American soldier, Capt. Humayun Khan, who was killed in Iraq. That prompted Mr. Trump to thank Mr. Nehlen on Twitter. And on Tuesday, Mr. Trump told the Washington Post that Mr. Nehlen was “running a very good campaign.”  This flirtation with Mr. Ryan’s challenger has infuriated Wisconsin’s leading Republicans. Gov. Scott Walker, who ran for president himself, and Senator Ron Johnson indicated that they would not join Mr. Trump for a scheduled appearance in Green Bay this week. And Mr. Walker on Wednesday posted a photograph of himself with Mr. Ryan on Twitter, saying,“We stand with Paul Ryan!”  Mr. Walker did not respond to a question about Mr. Trump but said in an email that “Paul Ryan will win because he is totally in touch with his district.”  Mr. Priebus, a Wisconsin native, is also said to be livid over Mr. Trump’s remarks about Mr. Ryan and debating the best way to demonstrate his solidarity with Mr. Ryan, from a formal endorsement to an email publicly stating his support, said three people with knowledge of Mr. Priebus’s internal discussions.  Video  Mr. Priebus has not had a direct conversation with Mr. Trump over the Ryan matter, according to people close to him. But he has been in contact with some of Mr. Trump’s children.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Since endorsing Mr. Trump, Mr. Ryan has continued to distance himself from the Republican nominee on several matters, from Mr. Trump’s proposed ban on Muslims entering the country to his comments criticizing Khizr and Ghazala Khan, Captain Khan’s parents.  Mr. Priebus has made a point of staying neutral in all aspects of Republican primaries, including when asked to speak out against Mr. Trump. Deciding to publicly back Mr. Ryan in his primary would be a step away from that.  For Mr. Priebus, Mr. Trump’s comments about Mr. Ryan were just the latest indignity in a week full of them. Earlier, Mr. Trump had criticized the Khan family for their speech at the Democratic National Convention and implied that Ms. Khan had not spoken because of her religion. Ms. Khan said she did not speak because she was worried she would be overcome with grief.  Mr. Trump’s missteps in the weeks since the Republican convention have spurred a degree of open criticism among otherwise supportive party officials rarely seen since he secured enough delegates for the nomination in May. On Wednesday, two Republican congressman who had expressed misgivings about Mr. Trump, Adam Kinzinger of Illinois and Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania, said they would not endorse him. The day before, another Republican congressman, Richard Hanna of New York, endorsed Mrs. Clinton. In the Senate, Ben Sasse, a Nebraska Republican, has been outspoken in opposing Mr. Trump.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Party officials are hamstrung — there is no mechanism for removing Mr. Trump as the party’s candidate; he would have to step down himself. Nonetheless, party leaders are said to be furious at the controversies involving him.  There are now active discussions among high-ranking Republican officials about how much longer the party can wait before recasting their focus away from Mr. Trump and toward down-ballot candidates. One adviser to Mr. Priebus indicated that, much as the party did when Bob Dole’s presidential campaign was flagging in 1996, officials may have to turn their attention to congressional and governors’ races as early as next month.  Some Republican strategists, however, have little sympathy for the party committee, noting that it smoothed the way for Mr. Trump’s nomination by aggressively putting down efforts to let delegates vote their conscience.  And, many in the party note, Mr. Priebus can hardly act surprised now about Mr. Trump’s erratic behavior, given his string of inflammatory comments since entering the race. “You would have to have had your eyes wide shut for the last year to think he would act differently in the general than he did in the primary,” said Josh Holmes, a top adviser to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At a campaign event in Daytona Beach, Fla., on Wednesday, Mr. Trump seized on national security and terrorism to lash into Mrs. Clinton, suggesting that if he had been president, the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks would not have happened.
Mrs. Clinton, who explicitly courted Republicans at last week’s convention, has already picked up a few telling Republican endorsements: Meg Whitman, the Hewlett Packard Enterprise executive who ran for governor of California as a Republican, backed Mrs. Clinton on Tuesday, as did Representative Richard Hanna of New York, a moderate Republican. Both denounced Mr. Trump’s treatment of the Khan family.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Still, the Trump campaign has left open the door to continued conflict with the Khan family. A memo circulated by Mr. Trump’s aides on Tuesday to his campaign surrogates urged them to express gratitude for the Khans’ sacrifice, but added that Mr. Trump had a “right to defend himself,” a person who received the document said.  In Mr. Trump’s five-day confrontation with a military family, Republicans have found the most agonizing test yet of their relationship with a candidate who has flouted political conventions around religion, race, gender and now military service. Republican strategists who once imagined Mr. Trump could be brought under control in a general election all but openly acknowledged this week that that prospect had vanished.  Video  Mr. Trump’s advisers have impressed upon him for days that his clash with the Khans was counterproductive, urging him instead to show deference to them and train his attacks on Mrs. Clinton, people close to the campaign said. Emissaries from the Trump campaign who spoke with Republican lawmakers and party officials in Washington were given the same bracing assessment. A few Republicans in Washington even suggested that Mr. Trump should apologize to the Khans.  Mr. Trump has instead gone in the opposite direction, standing by his harsh treatment of the couple and brazenly antagonizing Washington Republicans.  Liesl Hickey, a Republican strategist who led the party’s defense of its majority in the House of Representatives in 2014, said lawmakers should feel liberated to split with Mr. Trump if their survival depended on it.  Ms. Hickey has quietly circulated a battle plan to Republican leaders and vulnerable members of Congress, calling for a sharpened focus on winning over wavering Republicans, moderates and women — even if that means withdrawing support from Mr. Trump.  “Even if you were with Trump before, it doesn’t mean that now you necessarily need to stay with him,” she said.  Ms. Hickey, who has worked extensively with Republicans in swing districts, said the urgent imperative for many of them was “getting away from the national message.” She added, “Everybody who hasn’t fully kicked off their campaigns yet should be encouraged to do this.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Republican Party has not yet come close to abandoning Mr. Trump’s candidacy: Most of the lawmakers who have denounced him for fighting with the Khans have not said they will vote against him in the general election.  Even the Republicans assailed by Mr. Trump on Tuesday responded in muted language. Zack Roday, a spokesman for Mr. Ryan, said Mr. Ryan had not sought Mr. Trump’s endorsement and was confident that he would win his primary. Ms. Ayotte, who faces re-election in November, wrote on Twitter that she would “always stand up for our military families and what’s best for the people of New Hampshire.”  Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, has acknowledged the dispute with the Khans has harmed Mr. Trump, but he has pleaded with party leaders and donors to give Mr. Trump time to adjust to the general election, according to people briefed on Mr. Priebus’s conversations.  The Trump campaign has taken a few steps to recover its footing: Mr. Trump canceled a Thursday event in Plattsburgh, N.Y., a community with ties to the military in one of the country’s most heavily Democratic states. Trump strategists said the campaign would redouble its criticism of Mrs. Clinton’s support for military action in Iraq and Libya.  Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s top political adviser, accused Mrs. Clinton of seeking to “avoid a discussion of her failed record” at the State Department by pursuing Mr. Trump on other fronts.  “The Khan family has suffered an irreplaceable loss. For this loss, all Americans grieve,” Mr. Manafort said in an email. “The way to avoid these tragedies from continuing is to have leadership that will not make the mistakes of the Obama/Clinton administration.”  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But already, Mr. Trump’s stubbornness has carried a heavy price: Senior party leaders have scolded him, including Mr. McCain, who castigated Mr. Trump in a lengthy statement Monday.  Even one of Mr. Trump’s most steadfast allies, Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, said Tuesday that it was inappropriate to attack the Khan family.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You’re not going to find me being critical of Mr. and Mrs. Khan no matter what,” Mr. Christie said. “It’s just inappropriate for us in this context to be criticizing them, and I’m not going to participate in that.”  Mr. Trump at first appeared on Tuesday to restrain himself, up to a point. At a campaign stop in Northern Virginia, he avoided mentioning the Khans by name, but continued to grumble about his treatment by the news media.  He lamented to supporters that reporters had overlooked the story of Patricia Smith, the mother of a serviceman killed in the attack in Benghazi, Libya, in order to highlight “other people” — apparently a reference to the Khan family.  “They give her virtually no airtime, and they give other people unbelievable amounts of airtime,” Mr. Trump said. “It’s just so unfair. It’s so unfair.”  By the end of the day, Mr. Trump had turned that grievance into an explosive confrontation with the leaders of his own party.
But it was also a harbinger of future violence, and a glimpse of how Mr. Trump, who has promised to bring the country together, seems to have united Americans only in stirring their passion and anger.  Photo  What we are witnessing now is complicated, with few obvious heroes. At times, both sides have behaved badly.  Trump supporters are quick to turn on protesters, especially those who don’t look like them. They point and holler. Sometimes they spit and kick and shove. A young black woman in Kentucky was pushed and called names, her sign ripped from her hands. A black man in North Carolina was sucker-punched by a 78-year-old white man, who later looked into a camera and warned that next time, “We might have to kill him.”  To witness the crowd turn on the protesters in its midst is to watch a feverish body, bucking and writhing as it tries to eject an invading virus.  I have talked to protesters who still don’t quite have the words to describe what they felt when they were singled out and turned upon, often by their communities. Mr. Trump says he condemns violence. But he also shouts at his crowds to “Get ’em out!” And even when he urges them not to hurt the protesters, a hard edge of menace bullets his words.  Yet the protesters, too, have sometimes instigated the clashes. They fling themselves to the ground, forcing law enforcement officers — often outmanned and overwhelmed — to drag them away. They also shout and curse, making obscene gestures as they are led from events. And Friday night in Chicago, in perhaps the best-organized effort so far, they came not to simply stand quietly but to utterly halt Mr. Trump’s ability to deliver his speech.  Both sides say they feel deeply wronged and disenfranchised, albeit in different ways.  The Trump supporters I interview are almost unfailingly courteous. In the snaking lines of traffic that precede his events, they smile and wave and allow me to cut in front of them. And they politely answer my questions, explaining how their vision for the country — a place where if you worked hard and followed the rules, you could provide for your family and have a decent life — is being snatched from them.  Photo  Already, they feel as though their key rights — the ability to earn a fair wage, the right to own a gun — are slipping away. And now, they believe that the Republican Party is trying to withhold the nomination from Mr. Trump, and they are watching as protesters interrupt his events.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They are angry.  The 71-year-old woman I talked to before the New Orleans rally — who told me that “nothing short of Trump shooting my daughter in the street and my grandchildren” would dissuade her from voting for him — said she had been “forcibly retired,” part of a recent round of layoffs. To me, her comments reflected not just her genuine passion for Mr. Trump, but also the depth of her despair.  The protesters feel similarly wronged. Many of them are minorities — blacks, Hispanics, Muslims — who hear his pronouncements and are insulted, or even frightened. They, too, have a vision for this country and the American dream, believing that if they worked hard and followed the rules, they could melt into this nation that has welcomed so many.  They say they cannot stand by and do nothing as Mr. Trump calls Mexicans “rapists” and “criminals,” or threatens to bar all Muslims from entering the country.  Griselda Cardena Segovia, 20, a college sophomore, was part of a small group of young people who were removed from a Trump event on Monday in Concord, N.C., before it began, after they linked arms in silent protest.  She said she and her younger sister had come to peacefully observe the rally and support their parents, immigrants from Mexico whom they felt Mr. Trump was disparaging. But as soon as they entered, the crowd “looked at us wrong and you could feel the energy, that we weren’t wanted,” she said, adding that they found the scene — which included some of their high school teachers — to be jarring.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “We have never in our whole life, living here in Concord, we have never experienced racism until now,” Ms. Segovia said. “I never thought my town, that we contributed to, would treat us like this.”  After the rally, Ms. Segovia’s group stood on the grassy curb, holding signs. It was unseasonably warm for March — the sort of day when you might sneak out of work for a long lunch outside — and as cars exited, dozens rolled down their windows to shout obscenities and slurs at the young men and women. “Go back to Mexico,” someone hollered from an S.U.V. as it peeled away.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The group, clad in solid black and white T-shirts, replied with “God bless you,” but some of them, too, got caught up in the moment, chasing the cars and hurling their own invectives back.  The unnerving energy began infusing Mr. Trump’s rallies in recent weeks, just as I started covering him after several months on the Jeb Bush beat, where what constituted drama at a night rally was the candidate politely imploring his crowd to “please clap.”  As a reporter, I always try to anticipate where the story is headed, so I can get there first, or at least right alongside the news. And I quickly began jotting down notes on scenes of violence and near-violence, and gathering voices of angry, frustrated Trump supporters. Sometime soon, I warned my editors, someone is going to be seriously wounded — or worse — at a Trump rally, and we’ll want to have a story ready.  The images broadcast to the world Friday evening from Chicago — of people shouting and swinging at one another, of others lying bloodied in the streets — felt like a nation many of us didn’t recognize, or didn’t want to recognize.  The sights and sounds felt foreign and far away to me, too. But they were also right there, all in my notebook, gathering and growing and waiting to explode.  Because, in many ways, what happened Friday night in Chicago felt less surprising than it should have, and utterly inevitable.
Nearly 32 percent of voters cast their ballots before Election Day in 2012, according to census data, compared with 29.7 percent in 2008 and 20 percent in 2004.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  With Mrs. Clinton spending aggressively to try to dominate the early vote, Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly created distractions for himself in the past two weeks, is in jeopardy not just of being outmaneuvered but also of running out of chances to improve perceptions of him enough to win over undecided voters.  “When you have something as catastrophic as the Trump campaign is becoming, there aren’t enough weeks left to turn things around, and little ability to organize effectively and capture a strong share of the early vote,” said Mike Murphy, a veteran Republican strategist who worked on behalf of Jeb Bush during the primaries.  If Mrs. Clinton swamps Mr. Trump in the early vote in some swing states, she can move staff and money to the most competitive places — like Florida, North Carolina and Ohio, judging from recent polls — while he scrambles to battle on multiple fronts.  “As many as 40 percent of voters cast ballots in the early states, and you can’t organize overnight, or even in just a few weeks, and win them,” said Neil Newhouse, who was Mitt Romney’s pollster in 2012. “Truthfully, if the Clinton campaign inherited what the Obama campaign put together, they’ve got to have a head start in this over the Trump campaign.”  Indeed, Mrs. Clinton’s team, which includes a number of former top Obama campaign lieutenants, has been working with county officials to ensure that voters in swing states have places to cast their ballots early, organizing voters at the neighborhood level, and contacting those who may not know that they must request absentee ballots in jurisdictions that do not automatically send them.  Some Clinton allies are also organizing “souls to the polls” buses that take church members to vote immediately after Sunday church services in Democratic strongholds like Cleveland.  Early voters tend to be older and more partisan, and many choose to cast absentee ballots by mail, while others prefer to go to polling sites during special evening and weekend hours. In Arizona, many vote early rather than stand in long lines in the heat on Election Day.  Early voting rules and times vary widely by state, and some Republican-led legislatures have sought to put new limits on options like Sunday and evening voting — attempts that have been struck down in several court rulings. The Clinton campaign has “voter protection teams” of lawyers pushing for as much early voting as possible.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “In every state, our goal is to use all available tools so more voters have their voices heard in this election — whether that’s by mail, early vote, absentee, or on Election Day,” said Marlon Marshall, the Clinton campaign’s director of state campaigns and engagement. “We’ve been working for months to reach out to voters to make casting their ballot as easy and accessible as possible.”  Mr. Trump is lagging far behind. Unlike Mrs. Clinton, he has not been running television ads, which are crucial for engaging early voters, and he has state organizers of varying experience levels and scattershot ground troops in most places. His campaign is leaning on the Republican National Committee to open state offices to help with early voting. Both Mr. Romney and the 2008 Republican nominee, Senator John McCain, had more aggressive operations at this point.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s campaign chairman, said he did not think early voting would put Mr. Trump at a disadvantage, expressing confidence that the campaign’s ground operation would be well organized and executed and that Mr. Trump would ultimately attract enough undecided voters to win.  Mr. Manafort said the presidential debates would be critical for Mr. Trump; in the past, strong debate performances have led to a surge in early voting for the perceived winner, a boost that Mr. Romney enjoyed after he was widely seen as beating Mr. Obama in their first debate.  “We are organizing for this,” Mr. Manafort said about early voting. “We have very experienced people involved.” He declined to provide details.  He spoke before the news broke early Wednesday that Mr. Trump was shaking up his campaign by adding two top staff members and effectively demoting Mr. Manafort, although he will keep his title.  After Mr. Romney’s performance in that first 2012 debate, Republicans turned out in droves to vote or cast absentee ballots; Mr. Obama recovered in the next debate, and his ground forces mobilized so strongly in some places that he was able to cut back on campaigning in some key states. He visited Des Moines on the eve of the election “for nostalgia, not need,” said David Plouffe, a longtime Obama adviser.  “If you have an accurate model of how you are performing in early vote, you have an exact picture of where the race stands,” Mr. Plouffe said. In 2012, he added, the early vote trends in Iowa and Nevada meant “we could spend more time and money in Florida, most importantly.” Mr. Obama ended up winning Iowa and Nevada by about six percentage points and carried Florida with a one-point margin, he said.  But Mr. Obama and Mr. Romney also had campaign organizations capable of capitalizing on strong debate performances. “I don’t know if Trump has a great debate or gets a spike in support after it,” said Mr. Murphy, the Republican strategist, “but he certainly doesn’t have the machinery to take advantage of it by getting those people to the polls.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has pointed to the usually large numbers of people at his rallies, and their evident enthusiasm, as signs of strong support that will translate into energetic early voters. But during the Republican primaries, some Trump admirers at his rallies admitted they were not registered and had no plans to vote, and Trump advisers say that their voter registration efforts have been relatively modest.  Mrs. Clinton, by contrast, urges people at her rallies to register to vote, pointing them to clipboard-carrying volunteers who have forms to dispense and details about when, where and how to cast ballots.  “Hillary’s getting into early voting details while Trump can’t get past making awful sound bites,” said Bill Carrick, a Democratic strategist and media consultant. “The idea that he can fix things and win over swing voters in the final week or two — that’s not how elections are won anymore. It’s wishful thinking.”
“We are calling on the F.B.I. to release all the information that it has,” Mrs. Clinton said adamantly in an evening news conference that took issue with Mr. Comey for making the disclosure so close to the election. “Let’s get it out.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump was ebullient. “Perhaps, finally, justice will be done,” he declared at a campaign rally in New Hampshire.  A senior law enforcement official said that tens of thousands of emails belonging to Ms. Abedin were on Mr. Weiner’s laptop, which the F.B.I. had obtained as part of its investigation into Mr. Weiner. About a month ago, a person familiar with the investigation said, F.B.I. agents seized the laptop as well as Mr. Weiner’s iPad and cellphone.  Mr. Comey said in his letter to Congress that he did not know how long it would take to review the emails. Law enforcement officials said they did not know whether any were duplicates of emails discovered in the earlier investigation.  Mr. Trump has fallen behind Mrs. Clinton in most national polls and in many key states. Polls have been tightening in recent days, however, as Republicans have started returning to their party roots during the final stretch of the race.  An emboldened Mr. Trump seized on the F.B.I. action on Friday at his rally in New Hampshire. To cheers of “lock her up” from his supporters, Mr. Trump said: “Hillary Clinton’s corruption is on a scale we have never seen before. We must not let her take her criminal scheme into the Oval Office.”  After deriding the F.B.I. for weeks as inept and corrupt, Mr. Trump went on to praise the law enforcement agency.  “I have great respect for the fact that the F.B.I. and the D.O.J. are now willing to have the courage to right the horrible mistake that they made,” Mr. Trump said, referring also to the Department of Justice. “This was a grave miscarriage of justice that the American people fully understand. It is everybody’s hope that it is about to be corrected.”  The Clinton campaign called on Mr. Comey to provide information beyond what was put forth in the letter.  Photo  “Director Comey’s letter refers to emails that have come to light in an unrelated case, but we have no idea what those emails are and the director himself notes they may not even be significant,” said John D. Podesta, the chairman of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He added: “It is extraordinary that we would see something like this just 11 days out from a presidential election.”  Asked in an interview on CNN about Ms. Abedin’s involvement, Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, demurred.  “The facts of the matter is stuff that is unknown to us,” Mr. Fallon said.  The “October surprise” confounded leading Democrats who suddenly found themselves on the defensive.  “This is particularly troubling since so many questions are unanswered,” said Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California. “It’s unclear whether these emails have already been reviewed or if Secretary Clinton sent or received them. In fact, we don’t even know if the F.B.I. has these emails in its possession.”  Donna Brazile, the interim chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, demanded more information from Mr. Comey about his next steps and expressed concern about the agency interfering with the election.  “The F.B.I. has a solemn obligation to remain neutral in political matters — even the faintest appearance of using the agency’s power to influence our election is deeply troubling,” Ms. Brazile said.  For Republicans who have struggled to defend Mr. Trump amid his comments about women and conspiracy theories about a rigged election, the opportunity to revisit a controversy that has dogged Mrs. Clinton was a welcome gift.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Republican National Committee cheered the new attention on Mrs. Clinton’s emails as a potential turning point in the race.  “The F.B.I.’s decision to reopen their criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton’s secret email server just 11 days before the election shows how serious this discovery must be,” said Reince Priebus, the Republican committee chairman, arguing that the Democratic nominee should be disqualified from seeking the presidency. “This stunning development raises serious questions about what records may not have been turned over and why, and whether they show intent to violate the law.”  Photo  Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who has been critical of Mr. Trump, assailed Mrs. Clinton and said that she should no longer be allowed to receive classified briefings.  “Hillary Clinton has nobody but herself to blame,” Mr. Ryan said in an emailed statement. “She was entrusted with some of our nation’s most important secrets, and she betrayed that trust by carelessly mishandling highly classified information.”  After defending her email practices for months, Mrs. Clinton sought to put the issue behind her this year, eventually apologizing and acknowledging that using a private server was a mistake. During the presidential debates with Mr. Trump, she tried to avoid the subject and accused Mr. Trump of putting national security at risk by inviting Russian hackers to meddle in the election.  Mrs. Clinton and her staff expressed relief in July when Mr. Comey announced that the F.B.I. had closed the investigation after determining that no one should face criminal charges. But he did criticize Mrs. Clinton and her aides for what he termed the “extremely careless” handling of sensitive information, leaving an opportunity for Republicans to continue hammering her for bad judgment.  The involvement of Ms. Abedin and Mr. Weiner in Mrs. Clinton’s case was an unforeseen twist. Several weeks ago, top Justice Department officials decided that prosecutors in Manhattan would handle Mr. Weiner’s case. After seizing the devices, investigators have been combing them for information.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  It remained unclear whether Mr. Comey would reveal more about the contents of the newly discovered emails. In his memo to the F.B.I. staff, it was evident that he is keenly aware of the fraught political backdrop that he faces.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “We don’t ordinarily tell Congress about ongoing investigations, but here I feel an obligation to do so given that I testified repeatedly in recent months that our investigation was completed,” Mr. Comey wrote. “I also think it would be misleading to the American people were we not to supplement the record.”  Ms. Abedin separated from Mr. Weiner in August after it emerged that he was exchanging lewd messages with a woman on social media. Such behavior had destroyed his congressional career and his 2013 mayoral campaign.  Mr. Trump has pointed to Mrs. Clinton’s association with the couple as an example of her bad judgment.  “I only worry for the country in that Hillary Clinton was careless and negligent in allowing Weiner to have such close proximity to highly classified information,” Mr. Trump said in August. “Who knows what he learned and who he told?”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The State Department on Friday began releasing thousands of emails the F.B.I. collected as part of its investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server while secretary of state, but many were duplicates or near duplicates of messages already made public.  The emails released on Friday suggested that materials from the investigation might not add significant new information to an issue that has dogged Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign for a year and a half. They nonetheless revealed still more details about her tenure as secretary and the advice she received from those closest to her, including her husband, former President Bill Clinton.  One email offered a rare glimpse into the strategizing between the two Clintons on matters of foreign policy. In a message dictated to an aide, Mr. Clinton offers his recommendations for negotiating with China, India and other poor countries in the days leading to the Copenhagen conference on climate change in December 2009.  “I recommend that you begin by saying that this challenge is an opportunity if we approach it the right and way,” the note read, including an unnecessary word, “and provide the right financing options so that the old energy economy no longer has an advantage over new ways of providing and consuming energy.”  The State Department released only 75 new emails on Friday, including some that were merely brief replies to emails that had been previously turned over by Mrs. Clinton’s lawyers and made public under the Freedom of Information Act.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Under a new court order, the department is scheduled to continue releasing batches of emails before the election on Nov. 8. That has raised hopes among Mrs. Clinton’s critics that new disclosures could still damage her prospects. At a minimum, the staggered releases will keep a focus on her use of the server, which she has repeatedly acknowledged was a mistake.  The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey Jr., announced in July that he found insufficient evidence to recommend criminal charges against Mrs. Clinton, though he sharply criticized her and her aides for carelessly handling classified information that ended up in 110 emails that passed through the server.  Mr. Comey has since faced intense criticism from Republicans over his handling of the investigation, including decisions to give immunity to some of Mrs. Clinton’s aides in exchange for testimony.  “Folks, this is a very sad time, I’m telling you, for justice in this country,” the Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, said at a recent rally, where he ridiculed the investigation.  In reaction to the criticism, the F.B.I. took the unusual step of turning over to the State Department and Congress reams of materials related to its investigation, including 14,900 emails. More than 9,000 of those were deemed personal, however, and will not be made public. That leaves roughly 5,600 more, many of which will not become public until well after Election Day.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  It appeared that many of the emails the F.B.I. uncovered came from other accounts at the State Department or from fragments of the computer servers and phones Mrs. Clinton used.  Five of the emails released on Friday included replies or forwards to emails that contained information later upgraded to classified. One included a note from Mrs. Clinton to her aide Huma Abedin in response to a long discussion on Honduras in 2009. “All of this did not print last night,” she wrote. The original message, from Jake Sullivan, a senior policy adviser both then and now, was previously released by the State Department with sections blocked on the grounds they were classified confidential.  Mrs. Clinton was usually the recipient of the emails, not the sender. But in one email she expressed to a confidante what she said was her deep personal pain over the death and destruction caused by a 2010 earthquake in Haiti.  “We have much to do, my friend, and I’m sending strength and blessings to you and the Haitian people,” she wrote to Dr. Paul Farmer, co-founder of a group called Partners in Health, as he was preparing to go to Haiti to help with the relief effort, in which the Clinton Foundation played an important role.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “If we’re falling short in our efforts, pls yell. Love, Hillary,” she wrote.  In a separate email released last year by the State Department, Chelsea Clinton warned her parents that the relief efforts were indeed falling short.  The message with advice from Mr. Clinton, who has said he rarely used email, was sent through intermediaries. “I’ve had a busy day and too little time to study all the articles enough to give much good advice,” stated his note, dictated to an aide, Jason Cooper. “Call me anytime to talk,” he said, and forwarded two articles he wrote on climate change. It was signed simply “Bill.”  Another email came from Mark J. Penn, Mrs. Clinton’s former pollster, analyzing President Obama’s State of the Union address in 2010 (“pretty good speech — but he seemed angry”) while praising one of hers by contrast.  He offered a predication that proved false: “Only way for him to win second term is to ask you to be VP,” Mr. Penn wrote.
Photo  WASHINGTON — A string of emails that has been provided to the State Department raises new questions about whether Hillary Rodham Clinton has accurately described her use of a personal account when she was secretary of state.  Mrs. Clinton has said that she retained no emails from her first two months in office because she used an account that she no longer has access to. She has said that on March 19, 2009, she began using the personal account — hdr22@clintonemail.com — that she relied on for the rest of her time in office.  But on Friday, State Department officials said they had been given copies of an email chain between Mrs. Clinton and David H. Petraeus, the commander of United States Central Command at the time, that shows that Mrs. Clinton was using the hdr22@clintonemail.com account by Jan. 28, 2009.  The chain, with emails from Jan. 10, 2009, to Feb. 1, 2009, was provided to the State Department by its inspector general and by the Defense Department, according to State Department officials.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton has said publicly and in a court filing under oath that she gave the State Department last year all of the 30,000 work-related emails in her possession. It is not clear why she never provided the newly discovered email chain to the State Department or why she said she did not begin using the hdr22@clintonemail.com account until two months after she took office.  A spokesman for her presidential campaign declined to comment.  Six months after it was revealed that Mrs. Clinton relied exclusively on a personal email account when she was secretary of state, the issue continues to cause distractions for her campaign. In polls, voters have questioned her trustworthiness, and in Iowa and New Hampshire she trails Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the race for the Democratic nomination.  Video  Mrs. Clinton first addressed in March the issue of when she began using the account. On the same day that she held a news conference at the United Nations to address the account, her office released a nine-page document that said that “before March 18, 2009, Secretary Clinton continued using the email account she had used during her Senate service.” It added that “she, however, no longer had access to these emails once she transitioned” to using hdr22@clintonemail.com.  In a statement filed under oath in federal court in August, Mrs. Clinton said she had given the State Department all of the work-related emails on the personal account. “I have directed that all my emails on clintonemail.com in my custody that were or potentially were federal records be provided to the Department of State, and on information and belief, this has been done,” Mrs. Clinton said in the filing.  But the State Department had said in June that all or part of 15 work-related emails sent or received by Mrs. Clinton were not among the emails she gave to the department last year.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The State Department also said on Friday that it had informed the House committee investigating the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya, that it would give the panel 925 emails about Libya that Mrs. Clinton sent or received from January 2011 to December 2012.  In February, the department gave the panel 296 emails related to the attacks.  “The State Department has previously informed both the committee and the public that we had not provided all materials relating to Libya,” the State Department said in a statement. “The department instead focused on providing the Benghazi committee first with the 296 emails that directly pertained to the 2012 attacks in Benghazi. The documents provided today do not alter the fundamental facts known about the Benghazi attacks.”  Some Republicans perceived the production of the emails as an effort by Eric Snyder, a former Justice Department counter-terrorism prosecutor, who is now in charge of the State Department’s efforts to turn over documents to the committee, to establish a better relationship with the panel. Republicans had criticized Mr. Snyder’s predecessor, Catherine Duval, saying that she was holding back on documents.  A spokesman for the State Department, Alec Gerlach, rejected that assertion, arguing that in the last month that Ms. Duval worked at the State Department, it provided the committee with 20,000 pages of documents and began reviewing more of Mrs. Clinton’s emails to hand over to the committee.
WASHINGTON — Hillary Rodham Clinton was directly asked by congressional investigators in a December 2012 letter whether she had used a private email account while serving as secretary of state, according to letters obtained by The New York Times.  But Mrs. Clinton did not reply to the letter. And when the State Department answered in March 2013, nearly two months after she left office, it ignored the question and provided no response.  The query was posed to Mrs. Clinton in a Dec. 13, 2012, letter from Representative Darrell Issa, the Republican chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. Mr. Issa was leading an investigation into how the Obama administration handled its officials’ use of personal email.  “Have you or any senior agency official ever used a personal email account to conduct official business?” Mr. Issa wrote to Mrs. Clinton. “If so, please identify the account used.”  Mr. Issa also asked Mrs. Clinton, “Does the agency require employees to certify on a periodic basis or at the end of their employment with the agency they have turned over any communications involving official business that they have sent or received using nonofficial accounts?”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Issa’s letter also sought written documentation of the department’s policies for the use of personal email for government business. Mrs. Clinton left the State Department on Feb. 1, 2013, seven weeks after the letter was sent to her.  When Mr. Issa received a response from the State Department on March 27, all he got was a description of the department’s email policies. According to the letter, any employee using a personal account “should make it clear that his or her personal email is not being used for official business.”  Mrs. Clinton acknowledged last month that she had exclusively used a personal email account, which was housed on a server that had been specially set up for her, when she was secretary of state. She said that she used the private account for convenience purposes because she did not want to carry more than one electronic device. By using the private account, many of her emails were shielded from inquiries by Congress, the news media and government watchdogs.  The revelation has set off the first major test of her early presidential campaign, as she seeks to assure the public and the news media that she was not seeking to hide her correspondence.  Video  A congressional official provided The Times with a copy of Mr. Issa’s letter and the response from the State Department on the condition of anonymity because the official did not want to jeopardize his access to such information.  A spokesman for the State Department declined on Tuesday to answer questions about why it had not addressed Mr. Issa’s question about whether Mrs. Clinton or senior officials used personal email accounts.  “The department responds to thousands of congressional inquiries and requests for information each year,” said the spokesman, Alec Gerlach. “In its March 2013 letter, the department responded to the House Oversight Committee’s inquiry into the department’s ‘policies and practices regarding the use of personal email and other forms of electronic communications’ with a letter that described those policies in detail.”  An aide to Mrs. Clinton said in a statement Tuesday that “her usage was widely known to the over 100 department and U.S. government colleagues she emailed, as her address was visible on every email she sent.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Issa had sent letters to the State Department and other executive agencies after it was discovered that some administration and Environment Protection Agency officials had used private accounts to conduct government business.  In the State Department’s letter back to Mr. Issa, Thomas B. Gibbons, the acting assistant secretary for legislative affairs, described the department’s records management policies and guidelines.  He said “employees may use personal email on personal time for matters not directly related to official business, and any employee using personal email ‘should make it clear that his or her personal email is not being used for official business.’ ”  The State Department offered training on its record management programs to its employees, he said.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Hillary Rodham Clinton exclusively used a personal email account to conduct government business as secretary of state, State Department officials said, and may have violated federal requirements that officials’ correspondence be retained as part of the agency’s record.  Mrs. Clinton did not have a government email address during her four-year tenure at the State Department. Her aides took no actions to have her personal emails preserved on department servers at the time, as required by the Federal Records Act.  It was only two months ago, in response to a new State Department effort to comply with federal record-keeping practices, that Mrs. Clinton’s advisers reviewed tens of thousands of pages of her personal emails and decided which ones to turn over to the State Department. All told, 55,000 pages of emails were given to the department. Mrs. Clinton stepped down from the secretary’s post in early 2013.  Her expansive use of the private account was alarming to current and former National Archives and Records Administration officials and government watchdogs, who called it a serious breach.  “It is very difficult to conceive of a scenario — short of nuclear winter — where an agency would be justified in allowing its cabinet-level head officer to solely use a private email communications channel for the conduct of government business,” said Jason R. Baron, a lawyer at Drinker Biddle & Reath who is a former director of litigation at the National Archives and Records Administration.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, Nick Merrill, defended her use of the personal email account and said she has been complying with the “letter and spirit of the rules.”  Under federal law, however, letters and emails written and received by federal officials, such as the secretary of state, are considered government records and are supposed to be retained so that congressional committees, historians and members of the news media can find them. There are exceptions to the law for certain classified and sensitive materials.  Mrs. Clinton is not the first government official — or first secretary of state — to use a personal email account on which to conduct official business. But her exclusive use of her private email, for all of her work, appears unusual, Mr. Baron said. The use of private email accounts is supposed to be limited to emergencies, experts said, such as when an agency’s computer server is not working.  “I can recall no instance in my time at the National Archives when a high-ranking official at an executive branch agency solely used a personal email account for the transaction of government business,” said Mr. Baron, who worked at the agency from 2000 to 2013.  Regulations from the National Archives and Records Administration at the time required that any emails sent or received from personal accounts be preserved as part of the agency’s records.  But Mrs. Clinton and her aides failed to do so.  How many emails were in Mrs. Clinton’s account is not clear, and neither is the process her advisers used to determine which ones related to her work at the State Department before turning them over.  “It’s a shame it didn’t take place automatically when she was secretary of state as it should have,” said Thomas S. Blanton, the director of the National Security Archive, a group based at George Washington University that advocates government transparency. “Someone in the State Department deserves credit for taking the initiative to ask for the records back. Most of the time it takes the threat of litigation and embarrassment.”  Mr. Blanton said high-level officials should operate as President Obama does, emailing from a secure government account, with every record preserved for historical purposes.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Personal emails are not secure,” he said. “Senior officials should not be using them.”  Penalties for not complying with federal record-keeping requirements are rare, because the National Archives has few enforcement abilities.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Merrill, the spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, declined to detail why she had chosen to conduct State Department business from her personal account. He said that because Mrs. Clinton had been sending emails to other State Department officials at their government accounts, she had “every expectation they would be retained.” He did not address emails that Mrs. Clinton may have sent to foreign leaders, people in the private sector or government officials outside the State Department.  The revelation about the private email account echoes longstanding criticisms directed at both the former secretary and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, for a lack of transparency and inclination toward secrecy.  And others who, like Mrs. Clinton, are eyeing a candidacy for the White House are stressing a very different approach. Jeb Bush, who is seeking the Republican nomination for president, released a trove of emails in December from his eight years as governor of Florida.  It is not clear whether Mrs. Clinton’s private email account included encryption or other security measures, given the sensitivity of her diplomatic activity.  Mrs. Clinton’s successor, Secretary of State John Kerry, has used a government email account since taking over the role, and his correspondence is being preserved contemporaneously as part of State Department records, according to his aides.  Before the current regulations went into effect, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, who served from 2001 to 2005, used personal email to communicate with American officials and ambassadors and foreign leaders.  Last October, the State Department, as part of the effort to improve its record keeping, asked all previous secretaries of state dating back to Madeleine K. Albright to provide it with any records, like emails, from their time in office for preservation.  “These steps include regularly archiving all of Secretary Kerry’s emails to ensure that we are capturing all federal records,” said a department spokeswoman, Jen Psaki.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The existence of Mrs. Clinton’s personal email account was discovered by a House committee investigating the attack on the American Consulate in Benghazi as it sought correspondence between Mrs. Clinton and her aides about the attack.  Two weeks ago, the State Department, after reviewing Mrs. Clinton’s emails, provided the committee with about 300 emails — amounting to roughly 900 pages — about the Benghazi attacks.  Mrs. Clinton and the committee declined to comment on the contents of the emails or whether they will be made public.  The State Department, Ms. Psaki said, “has been proactively and consistently engaged in responding to the committee’s many requests in a timely manner, providing more than 40,000 pages of documents, scheduling more than 20 transcribed interviews and participating in several briefings and each of the committee’s hearings.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The State Department is expected to release the first batch of emails from Hillary Rodham Clinton’s private email address in the coming days.  The emails set for release, drawn from some 55,000 pages and focused on Libya, have already been turned over to the special House committee investigating the 2012 attacks on the United States outposts in Benghazi. The New York Times has obtained about a third of the 850 pages of emails.  They capture the correspondence and concerns expressed among Mrs. Clinton, who was secretary of state at the time, and her advisers following the attacks, which claimed the lives of the American ambassador, J. Christopher Stevens, and three other Americans.  The emails also offer occasional glimpses into the private side of Mrs. Clinton’s life, such as her public-radio listening habits and the fact that she was complimented for how she looked in a photo that appeared on the front page of The Times.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In response to requests from the news media and Mrs. Clinton, who has said she wants the emails to be made public, the State Department has drawn up plans to release them.  The emails appear to back up Mrs. Clinton’s previous assertions that she did not receive classified information at her private email address.  A Closer Look at Hillary Clinton’s Emails on Benghazi A review of some of the documents adds new dimension to the events surrounding the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya.  But some of the emails contain what the government calls “sensitive” information or “SBU” — sensitive but unclassified. This includes details of the whereabouts of State Department officials in Libya when security there was deteriorating during the 2011 revolution. One email from a year and a half before the attacks that was marked sensitive but unclassified contained the whereabouts of Mr. Stevens as he considered leaving Benghazi during the uprising against the Qaddafi regime because of the deteriorating security.  “The envoy’s delegation is currently doing a phased checkout (paying the hotel bills, moving some comms to the boat, etc.),” said the email that was forwarded to Mrs. Clinton from a close aide, Huma Abedin. “He will monitor the situation to see if it deteriorates further, but no decision has been made on departure. He will wait 2-3 more hours, then revisit the decision on departure.”  The emails also show that Mrs. Clinton was circulating information about the attacks in Benghazi that contradicted the Obama administration’s initial narrative of what occurred, and that she was concerned about how Republicans could use the incidents to undermine President Obama.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The emails show that even those at the highest levels of government engage in occasional flattering of those above them. In March 2011, Mrs. Clinton received an email from Ann-Marie Slaughter, the director of policy planning for the State Department, who was leaving her position.  “Gorgeous pic on the front page of the NYT!” Ms. Slaughter said, referring to a photo of Mrs. Clinton. “One for the wall...” Ms. Slaughter then moved on to more serious matters, including her opposition to arming the rebels in Libya.  It is not clear when the vast majority of Mrs. Clinton’s emails will be made public. The State Department has described the process of vetting and releasing them as time-consuming and had proposed to release them by January 2016. But a federal judge this week rejected that plan, suggesting that the department come up with a plan for a “rolling” release of the emails.  The intense interest in the emails stems in part from the revelation this year that Mrs. Clinton exclusively used a private email address to conduct her government work as secretary of state.
WASHINGTON — The State Department on Monday released the last set of emails from the 30,000 messages on Hillary Clinton’s private computer server, including an email about North Korea that remains a point of dispute between the department and one of the nation’s spy agencies over the secrecy of information that passed through the server.  That email — written on July 3, 2009, after a North Korean ballistic missile test — was one of four that prompted intensified scrutiny of the emails for classified information and a referral last year to the F.B.I. for a review of the handling of classified information by Mrs. Clinton, her aides and other State Department officials while she was secretary of state.  It was released as part of a chain of five replies and forwards on Monday with portions blocked out on the grounds that they contained information now classified “secret,” though not “top secret,” the higher classification that the spy agency, the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, had cited last summer.  “The original assessment was not correct, and the document does not contain top secret information,” a State Department spokesman, John Kirby, said. He added that the department had agreed to classify some of it “provisionally” pending further review, an indication that the dispute over the contents had not yet been resolved.  A spokesman for Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign, Brian Fallon, said the “ongoing disagreement” about the North Korean test “means that the intelligence community’s inspector general was wrong in his belief that this email was ‘top secret.’ ”  Mrs. Clinton and her aides have said that the intelligence agencies are overzealously classifying information, and in this case the State Department agreed. The designation of “secret” nevertheless added to the list of emails that the department has released only after removing information that is now considered sensitive on national security grounds.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Among the final 1,723 emails released on Monday were 23 that the department upgraded to “secret,” bringing the total classified as such to 65. Another 2,028 have had portions blocked out, or redacted, because the information is now “confidential.”  Of the four emails that prompted the referral to the F.B.I., only one has now been classified as “top secret.” It was among 22 emails that the State Department — at the demand of the C.I.A. — said it would not disclose, even in part, because they contained some of the nation’s most closely guarded secrets.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Government investigators said Friday that they had discovered classified information on the private email account that Hillary Rodham Clinton used while secretary of state, stating unequivocally that those secrets never should have been stored outside of secure government computer systems.  Mrs. Clinton has said for months that she kept no classified information on the private server that she set up in her house so she would not have to carry both a personal phone and a work phone. Her campaign said Friday that any government secrets found on the server had been classified after the fact.  But the inspectors general of the State Department and the nation’s intelligence agencies said the information they found was classified when it was sent and remains so now. Information is considered classified if its disclosure would likely harm national security, and such information can be sent or stored only on computer networks with special safeguards.  “This classified information never should have been transmitted via an unclassified personal system,” Steve A. Linick, the State Department inspector general, said in a statement signed by him and I. Charles McCullough III, the inspector general for the intelligence community.  The findings by the two inspectors general raise new questions about Mrs. Clinton’s use of her personal email at the State Department, a practice that since March has been criticized by her Republican adversaries as well as advocates of open government, and has made some Democrats uneasy. Voters, however, do not appear swayed by the issue, according to polls.  Video  In their joint statement, the inspectors general said the classified information had originated with the nation’s intelligence agencies, such as the Central Intelligence Agency or the National Security Agency. It is against the law for someone to receive a classified document or briefing and then summarize that information in an unclassified email.  The two investigators did not say whether Mrs. Clinton sent or received the emails. If she received them, it is not clear that she would have known that they contained government secrets, since they were not marked classified. The inspectors general did not address whether they believed Mrs. Clinton should have known such information was not appropriate for her personal email.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Regardless, the disclosure is an example of an unforeseen consequence of Mrs. Clinton’s unusual computer setup. Security experts have questioned whether her practice made government secrets more vulnerable to security risks and hacking.  Exactly how much classified information Mrs. Clinton had on the server is unclear. Investigators said they searched a small sample of 40 emails and found four that contained government secrets. But Mr. McCullough said in a separate statement that although the State Department had granted limited access to its own inspector general, the department rejected Mr. McCullough’s request for access to the 30,000 emails that Mrs. Clinton said were government-related and gave to the State Department.  Mrs. Clinton’s lawyer, David Kendall, is “purported” to also have copies of the 30,000 emails on a thumb drive, according to Mr. McCullough.  Campaigning in New York on Friday, Mrs. Clinton pledged to cooperate with inquiries into her emails, but also said she would stay focused on the issues at the heart of her presidential campaign.  “We are all accountable to the American people to get the facts right, and I will do my part,” Mrs. Clinton said. “But I’m also going to stay focused on the issues, particularly the big issues, that really matter to American families.”  The discovery of the four emails prompted Mr. McCullough to refer the matter to F.B.I. counterintelligence agents, who investigate crimes related to the mishandling of classified information. On Thursday night and again Friday morning, the Justice Department referred to the matter as a “criminal referral,” but later Friday dropped the word “criminal.” The inspectors general said late Friday that it was a “security referral” intended to alert authorities that “classified information may exist on at least one private server and thumb drive that are not in the government’s possession.”  Irrespective of the terminology, the referral raises the possibility of a Justice Department investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s emails as she campaigns for president. Polls show she is the front-runner for the Democratic nomination by a wide margin.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mishandling classified information is a crime. Justice Department officials said no decision had been made about whether to open a criminal investigation.  The refusal by the State Department to give Mr. McCullough access to the emails has reignited calls by Republicans for Mrs. Clinton to hand over the server that she used to house the personal email account.  “If Secretary Clinton truly has nothing to hide, she can prove it by immediately turning over her server to the proper authorities and allowing them to examine the complete record,” Speaker John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, said on Friday. “Her poor judgment has undermined our national security, and it is time for her to finally do the right thing.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Justice Department is typically reluctant to open politically charged investigations unless there is clear evidence of criminal wrongdoing. For example, authorities said last year that they would not open an investigation into dueling claims by the C.I.A. and the Senate Intelligence Committee in a dispute that also centered around access to classified information.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The State Department on Friday said for the first time that “top secret” material had been sent through Hillary Clinton’s private computer server, and that it would not make public 22 of her emails because they contained highly classified information.  The department announced that 18 emails exchanged between Mrs. Clinton and President Obama would also be withheld, citing the longstanding practice of preserving presidential communications for future release. The department’s spokesman, John Kirby, said that exchanges did not involve classified information.  The disclosure of the top secret emails, three days before Iowans vote in the first-in-the-nation caucuses, is certain to fuel the political debate over the unclassified computer server that Mrs. Clinton, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, kept in her home. The State Department released another set of her emails on Friday night in response to a Freedom of Information Act request.  The top secret emails lent credence to criticism by Mrs. Clinton’s rivals in the presidential race of her handling of classified information while she was secretary of state from 2009 to 2013. It is against the law for officials to discuss classified information on unclassified networks used for routine business or on private servers, and the F.B.I. is looking into whether such information was mishandled.  The State Department said it had “upgraded” the classification of the emails at the request of the nation’s intelligence agencies. Mr. Kirby said that none of the emails had been marked at any level of classification at the time they were sent through Mrs. Clinton’s computer server.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign responded forcefully, saying that the process of reviewing the emails “appears to be over-classification run amok.” A spokesman, Brian Fallon, said all of the emails should be released.  “We understand that these emails were likely originated on the State Department’s unclassified system before they were ever shared with Secretary Clinton, and they have remained on the department’s unclassified system for years,” Mr. Fallon said.  Neither Mr. Kirby nor other officials would discuss the emails now being withheld, but the classified emails include those cited in a letter sent to the Senate on Jan. 14 by the inspector general of the nation’s intelligence agencies, I. Charles McCullough III.  Mr. McCullough wrote that “several dozen emails” contained classified information, including some now determined to contain information at the “top secret/S.A.P.” level. That designation refers to “special access programs,” which are among the government’s most closely guarded secrets.  It was not clear whether those emails were written by Mrs. Clinton or, as has been more often the case with the thousands of emails released so far, were messages written by other State Department officials and forwarded by her closest aides.  Officials at the State Department have said the “upgrading” of the classification of Mrs. Clinton’s emails has been routine. Mr. Kirby said Friday that the classification review was “focused on whether they need to be classified today.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Emails previously released by the State Department have been redacted because they were deemed to contain information that should not be made public. But the 22 top secret emails are the first to be withheld entirely.  The latest developments prompted new attacks on Mrs. Clinton from Republican presidential candidates. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, campaigning in Iowa, said the disclosure disqualified her to be president.  “If someone on my staff did what she did, you know what would happen?” he said. “They would be fired, and they would be prosecuted.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said in a statement that it made no sense to her that “Secretary Clinton can be held responsible for email exchanges that originated with someone else.”  “The only reason to hold Secretary Clinton responsible for emails that didn’t originate with her is for political points, and that’s what we’ve seen over the past several months,” she added.  The Clinton campaign’s response has reflected an effort to highlight the selective judgments that can be involved in the classification process.  Mrs. Clinton, in an interview with NPR last week, suggested that at least one of the emails at issue included an article from The New York Times about the administration’s classified drone programs. It was not clear which article she was referring to; the use of drones has been the subject of numerous news reports and books.  “How a New York Times public article that goes around the world could be in any way viewed as classified, or the fact that it would be sent to other people off of the New York Times site, I think, is one of the difficulties that people have in understanding what this is about,” she said.  At the same time, she has acknowledged that it was a mistake to set up the private server.  The State Department and the intelligence agencies have been wrangling over the email review ever since Mr. McCullough, acting on the request of Republican members of Congress, objected last summer to the release of some emails that intelligence officials had claimed included classified information. Friday was supposed to be the deadline for releasing all of the 33,000 emails from the server, but officials have appealed for an extension.
The report also criticized Mrs. Clinton for not adhering to the department’s rules for handling records under the Federal Records Act once she stepped down in January 2013. She did not do so until late 2014, when the State Department, under pressure from Republicans in Congress investigating the 2011 attack in Benghazi, Libya, that killed four Americans, requested that she turn them over.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It was only then that Mrs. Clinton instructed her aides to cull through roughly 60,000 emails that had passed through the server and turn over those involving official business. Those amounted to roughly half of the total. “Secretary Clinton should have surrendered all emails dealing with department business before leaving government service and, because she did not do so, she did not comply with the department’s policies that were implemented in accordance with the Federal Records Act,” the report said.  While acknowledging that Mrs. Clinton had ultimately complied with requests to turn over the emails, the report determined that the effort was “incomplete.” Investigators found that she had not included those she sent and received in her first months as secretary from January to April 2009. Last year, the Department of Defense also turned over 19 emails between Mrs. Clinton and then-Gen. David H. Petraeus that had been sent from his official email account to her private account but had not been included among those turned over.  The report broadly criticized the State Department as well, saying that officials had been “slow to recognize and to manage effectively the legal requirements and cybersecurity risks” that emerged in the era of emails, particularly those of senior officials like Mrs. Clinton.  It said that “longstanding systemic weaknesses” in handling electronic records went “well beyond the tenure of any one secretary of state.” The inspector general’s review covered the practices of five secretaries going back to Madeleine K. Albright, when the Internet remained a novelty, especially in the hidebound bureaucracy of the State Department.  Mrs. Albright and Condoleezza Rice told the inspector general that they did not use personal email. But the report singled out Mr. Powell, who was secretary from 2001 to 2005, saying he regularly used a private email address to communicate with people outside the building.  Related Coverage  Mr. Powell told investigators he used the address only for unclassified emails, but at least two emails forwarded to him have since been determined to have included information that is now classified.  The rules governing emails under previous secretaries were, the report said, “very fluid.” By the time Mrs. Clinton came to office, however, they were “considerably more detailed and sophisticated,” spelling out the “obligation to use department systems in most circumstances and identifying the risks of not doing so.”  The department issued numerous warnings dating back a decade about the cybersecurity risks of using personal emails accounts for government business, the report said. Mrs. Clinton was personally sent a memo in 2011 warnings of hackers trying to target unclassified, personal email accounts. She was also given a classified, in-person briefing on the dangers, the report said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The report also disclosed an attempt to hack into Mrs. Clinton’s server in January 2011. It said a “nondepartmental adviser” to Bill Clinton — apparently Bryan Pagliano, who installed the private server — informed the department that he had shut down the system because “someone was trying to hack us and while they did not get in, I didn’t want to let them have a chance.”  The attack continued later that day, prompting another official to write to two of Mrs. Clinton’s top aides, Cheryl D. Mills and Jake Sullivan, to warn them not to send her “anything sensitive.” The official said that she would “explain more in person.” The report found that while dozens of State Department employees used personal email accounts periodically over the years, including Ms. Mills and Mr. Sullivan, only three officials were found to have used it “exclusively” for day-to-day operations: Mrs. Clinton; Mr. Powell, and Jonathan Scott Gration, who was ambassador to Kenya from 2011 to 2012.  Department officials never directly told Mrs. Clinton or Mr. Powell that they needed to end their use of personal email, the report found, but in Mr. Gration’s case, they did. In 2011, officials warned him that he was not authorized to use personal email for government business in Kenya. He continued doing so, and the department initiated disciplinary action over “his failure to follow these directions” and several other undisclosed infractions, the report said. He resigned in 2012 before any action was taken.  Secretary of State John Kerry also acknowledged to the inspector general that he had used a personal account at times, but “began primarily using his department email account to conduct official business.” Mr. Kerry said that while he still occasionally responded to people who emailed him on his personal account, he would preserve the emails for the record.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The dispute over Hillary Clinton’s email practices now threatens to shadow her for the rest of the presidential campaign after the disclosure on Monday that the F.B.I. collected nearly 15,000 new emails in its investigation of her and a federal judge’s order that the State Department accelerate the documents’ release.  As a result, thousands of emails that Mrs. Clinton did not voluntarily turn over to the State Department last year could be released just weeks before the election in November. The order, by Judge James E. Boasberg of Federal District Court, came the same day a conservative watchdog group separately released hundreds of emails from one of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides, Huma Abedin, which put a new focus on the sometimes awkward ties between the Clinton Foundation and the State Department.  The F.B.I. discovered the roughly 14,900 emails by scouring Mrs. Clinton’s server and the computer archives of government officials with whom she corresponded. In late July, it turned them over to the State Department, which now must set a timetable for their release, according to Judge Boasberg’s order.  While the emails were not in the original trove of 55,000 pages that Mrs. Clinton’s lawyers handed to the State Department last year, the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, said in July that he did not believe they had been “intentionally deleted.” Still, he characterized Mrs. Clinton’s handling of classified information during her years at the State Department as “extremely careless.”  Under the likely timetable, the soonest the new emails would be released is October. The State Department released the original emails in monthly installments over nearly a year, through February, though it missed several court-ordered deadlines as its staff and other agencies scrutinized the documents for classified information.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Despite Mr. Comey’s conclusion that Mrs. Clinton mishandled classified information, he said last month that the F.B.I. would not recommend criminal charges against her, which finally seemed to ease the threat that her handling of emails has posed to her presidential campaign. But the prospect of further disclosures from Mrs. Clinton’s emails suggests that the issue will not be put to rest so easily.  “Hillary Clinton seems incapable of telling the truth,” the chairman of the Republican National Committee, Reince Priebus, said in a statement. “The process for reviewing these emails needs to be expedited, public disclosure should begin before early voting starts, and the emails in question should be released in full before Election Day.”  The Clinton campaign said Mrs. Clinton had turned over all the work-related emails she had in her possession in 2014 to the State Department. “We are not sure what additional materials the Justice Department may have located,” said the campaign’s spokesman, Brian Fallon. “But if the State Department determines any of them to be work-related, then obviously we support those documents being released publicly as well.”  A State Department spokesman, Mark C. Toner, said it would have to review the documents to determine which were personal or work-related, and whether any duplicated emails had already been released in response to lawsuits brought by the conservative watchdog group, Judicial Watch, under the Freedom of Information Act.  The group said that the 725 pages of documents it released Monday demonstrated efforts by the Clinton family foundation to leverage its influence with Mrs. Clinton. The emails, drawn from Ms. Abedin, included an appeal by Douglas Band, a Clinton Foundation executive, for Mrs. Clinton to meet with Bahrain’s crown prince, whose family had contributed millions of dollars to the foundation.  “Good friend of ours,” Mr. Band wrote.  Ms. Abedin, after expressing Mrs. Clinton’s reluctance to schedule a meeting “until she knows how she will feel,” then wrote back to Mr. Band to offer the crown prince an appointment the next morning. She encouraged Mr. Band to let the prince know, “if you see him,” though she said the State Department had also contacted him through official channels.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But Ms. Abedin expressed qualms when Mr. Band appealed to her to help arrange an interview in the British Embassy to get a visa for a member of the Wolverhampton Football Club, who had a criminal charge against him. Mr. Band was helping Casey Wasserman, a sports marketing executive who had donated money to the Clinton Foundation. Mr. Wasserman is a co-chairman of a fund-raiser Mrs. Clinton will attend this week in Beverly Hills, Calif.  “I get this now, makes me nervous to get involved but I’ll ask,” Ms. Abedin wrote.  “Then don’t,” Mr. Band replied.  Judicial Watch’s president, Tom Fitton, said the emails included 20 exchanges with Mrs. Clinton herself that were not among those her lawyers turned over to the State Department. The emails, he said, showed how Ms. Abedin served as a conduit between the department and the Clinton Foundation, citing the exchange over the crown prince’s meeting.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It is hard to tell where the State Department ended and where the Clinton Foundation began,” he said. “They were working hand in glove.”  Under the process set by Judge Boasberg on Monday, the State Department will review the new emails and documents and present the court with a schedule for releasing them. Mr. Fitton said that process could begin in October, or could be delayed as the department reviews which are personal and which are work-related.  “The question is how many of those are truly personal,” he said.  Separately, a prominent House Republican pressed the F.B.I. on Monday to explain why it had redacted emails and summaries of its interview with Mrs. Clinton, which it turned over to Congress last week.  Representative Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah and chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, said in an interview that nearly half the material was redacted, including “a lot of redactions for things that aren’t warranted.” He also said there were inconsistencies in the two copies of the documents that the F.B.I. submitted to Congress.  In a letter to Mr. Comey on Monday, Mr. Chaffetz demanded that the F.B.I. explain its legal basis for the redactions and why the two copies were inconsistent. He said the F.B.I. should submit an unclassified version of its report, which presumably could be made public.
Still, it issued stinging criticism of the overall delay in response and the lack of preparedness on the part of the government.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The assets ultimately deployed by the Defense Department in response to the Benghazi attacks were not positioned to arrive before the final, lethal attack,” the committee wrote. “The fact that this is true does not mitigate the question of why the world’s most powerful military was not positioned to respond.”  But the lack of any clear finding of professional misconduct or dereliction of duty was certain to fuel further criticism of the length of the investigation — more than two years — and the expense, estimated at more than $7 million. It also bolstered Democrats’ allegations that the inquiry was specifically intended to damage Mrs. Clinton’s presidential prospects.  After a campaign stop in Denver, Mrs. Clinton said that the investigation had uncovered nothing to contradict past findings, and that the House committee’s work had assumed a “partisan tinge.”  “I’ll leave it to others to characterize this report,” she said, “but I think it’s pretty clear it’s time to move on.”  Yet even as Mrs. Clinton seemed eager to press forward, she must still contend with the fallout from the committee’s most significant, if inadvertent, discovery: that she exclusively used a private email server during her four years as secretary of state. That revelation has spurred separate investigations into whether classified material was mishandled, including a continuing inquiry by the F.B.I.  In a sign that Mr. Gowdy was also facing pressure from the right, two of the committee’s conservative members, Representatives Jim Jordan of Ohio and Mike Pompeo of Kansas, wrote a 48-page addendum including somewhat harsher criticism of Mrs. Clinton and the Obama administration.  Video  After the attack, “with the presidential election just 56 days away, rather than tell the American people the truth and increase the risk of losing an election, the administration told one story privately and a different story publicly,” Mr. Jordan and Mr. Pompeo wrote.  Technically, the report is not final until the full committee formally votes to accept it, which it is scheduled to do July 8.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Among the committee’s chief findings:  ■ Despite authorization from President Obama, no American military forces were deployed to Benghazi on the night of the attacks, and Marines stationed in Spain repeatedly received conflicting orders.  ■ The Libyan forces that helped evacuate Americans from a C.I.A. annex to the Benghazi airport were not part of militias allied with the United States, but were fighters previously loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya.  ■ Susan E. Rice, then the United States ambassador to the United Nations, made numerous false statements about the Benghazi attack on television that one State Department press officer described in an email as “off the reservation on five networks!”  ■ Senior State Department officials — including Mrs. Clinton’s chief of staff, Cheryl D. Mills — exerted too much influence over the Accountability Review Board that conducted the department’s own inquiry, casting doubt on its independence and findings.  ■ The Obama administration repeatedly sought to obstruct the select committee’s investigation by delaying or refusing to respond to requests for documents and testimony.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The committee made scant mention of procedures put in place since the Benghazi attacks, which fundamentally changed the way American embassies and consulates operate.  The State Department has taken a maximalist approach to security that some diplomats now say makes it difficult for them to carry out their responsibilities. The Defense Department has increased the number of Marine guards at diplomatic posts and created new crisis-response teams.  Democrats on the committee complained that they had been excluded from decisions on the report, and noted that the Benghazi investigation had dragged on longer than the inquiries into the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks; the assassination of President John F. Kennedy; the attack on Pearl Harbor; and the response to Hurricane Katrina.  In the most dramatic confrontation over the two years of the investigation, Mrs. Clinton testified before the committee for more than eight hours in October. The hearing was widely perceived to have backfired on Republicans, as she answered their questions and coolly deflected their attacks.  Video  By the time of her testimony, Mrs. Clinton had already taken responsibility for the State Department’s handling of the attacks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Previous investigations concluded that State Department officials had erred in not better securing the diplomatic compound amid reports of a deteriorating security situation. But they also determined that the attacks had come with little warning and that it would have been difficult to intervene once they had begun.  The investigations generally concluded that after the attack, the Obama administration’s talking points were flawed but not deliberately misleading.  The Pentagon had no forces that could be readily sent to Benghazi when the crisis began. The closest AC-130 gunship was in Afghanistan. There were no armed drones within range of Libya. There was no Marine expeditionary unit, a large seaborne force with its own helicopters, in the Mediterranean Sea.  The Africa Command also did not have on hand a force able to respond rapidly to emergencies. Every other regional command had one at the time. The Pentagon was caught unprepared for this type of crisis.  On the night of the attacks, the Pentagon was able to divert an unarmed Predator drone operating 90 miles away to Benghazi, and the C.I.A. later used it to help plan an escape route for the surviving Americans. But other military forces were too far away or could not be mobilized in time, military commanders have said.  The unclassified version of an independent 2012 report, headed by Thomas R. Pickering, a former diplomat, concluded that “there simply was not enough time, given the speed of the attacks, for armed U.S. military assets to have made a difference.”  But that report did not address whether it would have been prudent to station quick-reaction forces in the region, a step the Pentagon has since taken.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At a news conference at the Capitol on Tuesday, Mr. Gowdy praised as heroes the Americans who died in the attacks on Sept. 11, 2012. They included Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and Sean Smith, a State Department information officer, who were killed at the main American diplomatic compound in Benghazi by a mob of militia fighters who had been incited by an American-made video deriding the Prophet Muhammad. The fighters were apparently further inflamed by news of an assault on the American Embassy in Cairo.  Two other Americans, Tyrone S. Woods and Glen A. Doherty, who were contractors for the C.I.A., died later when a separate annex run by the agency was hit by mortars. The attacks spanned about eight hours.  At the time the select committee was created, there had been at least seven congressional inquiries into the Benghazi attacks in addition to the State Department’s review, with all of them reaching much the same conclusion.  Mr. Gowdy urged Americans to read all 800 pages of the report. “You can read this report from pillar to post in less time than our fellow Americans were under attack in Benghazi,” he said.
As Mr. Comey strode to the lectern at the F.B.I. headquarters at 11 a.m., Mrs. Clinton was waiting backstage a few blocks away to address the National Education Association. Her aides said she did not know what Mr. Comey was going to say. Five minutes into Mr. Comey’s remarks, and before he announced that the F.B.I. would not seek charges, a smiling Mrs. Clinton began her speech.  Photo  By 2:45 p.m., she and Mr. Obama were descending the stairs of Air Force One for a campaign rally in Charlotte, N.C., while back in Washington the State Department spokesman, John Kirby, was fending off questions from reporters about what Mr. Comey described as the department’s lax security in handling classified information.  White House officials said Mr. Obama also did not know about Mr. Comey’s plans ahead of time. The F.B.I. director said he did not coordinate the statement with the Justice Department or any other agency. “They do not know what I am about to say,” he declared.  A Republican former federal prosecutor, Mr. Comey seemed at first to be laying the groundwork for some kind of legal charge. Speaking sternly, and in far more detail than he usually does, he listed several previously undisclosed findings from the F.B.I.’s investigation:  ■ Of 30,000 emails Mrs. Clinton handed over to the State Department, 110 contained information that was classified at the time she sent or received them. Of those, Mr. Comey said, “a very small number” bore markings that identified them as classified. This finding is at odds with Mrs. Clinton’s repeated assertions that none of the emails were classified at the time she sent or received them. The F.B.I. did not disclose the topics of the classified emails, but a number of the 110 are believed to have involved drone strikes.  ■ The F.B.I. discovered “several thousand” work-related emails that were not in the original trove of 30,000 turned over by Mrs. Clinton to the State Department. Three of those contained information that agencies have concluded was classified, though Mr. Comey said he did not believe Mrs. Clinton deliberately deleted or withheld them from investigators.  ■ In saying that it was “possible” that hostile foreign governments had gained access to Mrs. Clinton’s personal account, Mr. Comey noted that she used her mobile device extensively while traveling outside the United States, including trips “in the territory of sophisticated adversaries.”  ■ Mrs. Clinton used multiple private servers for her personal and government business, not just a single server at her home in New York that has been the focus of media reporting for more than a year. Her use of these servers — some of which were taken out of service and stored — made the F.B.I.’s job enormously complicated as it struggled to put together, in Mr. Comey’s words, a jigsaw puzzle with “millions of email fragments” in it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Despite all that, Mr. Comey said the F.B.I. did not find that Mrs. Clinton’s conduct revealed “intentional misconduct or indications of disloyalty to the United States or efforts to obstruct justice.” But a person in her position, he said, “should have known that an unclassified system was no place” for the emails she was sending. And he said it raised troubling questions about how the State Department handled classified information.  The White House press secretary, Josh Earnest, declined to comment, except to say it was clear from Mr. Comey’s remarks that “they’ve looked at this in excruciating detail.” Mr. Obama, he said, remained “enthusiastic” about Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy.  The Clinton campaign clearly hoped that the announcement would bring to a close a saga that has haunted Mrs. Clinton since March 2015, when the existence of her personal email account surfaced.  “We are pleased that the career officials handling this case have determined that no further action by the department is appropriate,” said the campaign’s spokesman, Brian Fallon. “As the secretary has long said, it was a mistake to use her personal email and she would not do it again. We are glad that this matter is now resolved.”  Republicans seized on Mr. Comey’s sharp criticism, saying it raised doubts about Mrs. Clinton’s fitness for high office. Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, asserted in a post on Twitter that David H. Petraeus, the former C.I.A. director, had been charged for doing far less than Mrs. Clinton, and the lack of charges showed that the system was “rigged.”  In fact, F.B.I. officials have long said that what Mr. Petraeus did — knowingly handing a diary with classified information to his biographer and lover, then lying about it to investigators — was worse than what Mrs. Clinton did. In the Petraeus case, the F.B.I. recommended a felony indictment, but the Justice Department allowed him to plead to a misdemeanor. The deal that Mr. Petraeus received shadowed Mrs. Clinton’s case from the start because it appeared to set a higher bar for bringing charges against her.  “In looking back at our investigations into the mishandling or removal of classified information,” Mr. Comey said, “we cannot find a case that would support bringing criminal charges on these facts.”  Congressional Republicans swiftly called for the F.B.I. to release more details about its findings. “If it wants to avoid giving the impression that the F.B.I. was pulling punches,” said Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Republican chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, “the agency must now be more transparent than ever in releasing information.”  Breaking News Alerts Sign up to receive an email from The New York Times as soon as important news breaks around the world.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Speaker Paul D. Ryan was equally critical. “While I respect the professionals at the F.B.I., this announcement defies explanation,” he said in a Twitter post. “No one should be above the law.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For an agency that seemed to be in no rush, the F.B.I.’s investigation wrapped up quickly. By the time the investigators interviewed Mrs. Clinton in three and a half hours of questioning on Saturday, they had compiled months of findings. Mrs. Clinton appeared to say nothing to contradict what they had already discovered about how the private server was used, a law enforcement official said. The investigators then worked with Mr. Comey through the holiday weekend to review her testimony and determine whether there was any new information that might warrant criminal charges, law enforcement officials said. They found none.  For weeks, F.B.I. agents expected the investigation would not yield charges. They shared Mr. Comey’s conclusion that Mrs. Clinton had showed poor judgment but that she had not committed a crime.  In the spring, Mr. Comey declared that the campaign calendar would not dictate the pace of the investigation. But the Democratic National Convention begins on July 25 in Philadelphia, and F.B.I. officials did not want to be seen as influencing the outcome of the election after the nomination.  Mr. Comey’s announcement was believed to be the first time that the F.B.I. had ever publicly disclosed its recommendations to the Justice Department about whether to charge someone in any high-profile case, let alone a presidential candidate. His decision to announce the results of the investigation was made before the uproar over Ms. Lynch’s meeting with Mr. Clinton, according to a law enforcement official. He decided to make his findings public, the official said, because he wanted to make the F.B.I.’s position clear before referring the case to the Justice Department.  While the F.B.I.’s recommendation spares Mrs. Clinton and her aides criminal charges, it does not remove the possibility that they could be denied security clearances if Mrs. Clinton is elected and she appoints them to jobs that require such clearance. The State Department plans to conduct its own administrative review after the Justice Department acts.  “We don’t share the broad assessment made of our institution that there’s a lax culture here when it comes to protecting classified information,” said Mr. Kirby, the State Department spokesman. “We take it very, very seriously.”
Without mentioning the email controversy, Mr. Obama pointed to the political attacks that have chipped away at Mrs. Clinton’s trust among voters. “Can I be blunt?” he said. “Hillary’s got her share of critics.” But, he added, “That’s what happens when you dedicate yourself to public service over a lifetime.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama delicately touched on Mrs. Clinton’s perceived weaknesses as a candidate even as he marveled at her tenacity in the nominating fight they waged against each other eight years ago. In an election year in which outsider candidates have railed against the establishment, Mr. Obama portrayed Mrs. Clinton’s decades-long experience as a plus.  “Sometimes we take somebody who has been in the trenches and fought the good fight and been so steady for granted,” he said, recognizing that voters’ yearning for the next new thing had helped his own 2008 campaign. “We don’t do that, by the way, for airline pilots.”  At a time when her State Department tenure is being picked apart by political critics, he defended her turn as the nation’s top diplomat, noting how her popularity faded only once she returned to the political spotlight. “It’s funny how the filter changes a little bit,” he said. “The filter is a powerful thing.”  Mrs. Clinton, perched on a stool behind the president, grinned and gently nodded.  The swing-state rally in North Carolina was rescheduled after a previous campaign event in Wisconsin was hastily canceled after the Orlando shootings. But in some ways, the moment had been years in the making.  Eight years ago, after a brutal primary fight, Mrs. Clinton appeared arm in arm with Mr. Obama for the first time in Unity, N.H., where she declared, “Unity is not only a beautiful place, it’s a wonderful feeling, isn’t it?”  Mr. Obama referred to that event at Tuesday’s rally in North Carolina, a rally that served as a kind of bookend to two remarkable careers that at times seemed destined to clash. “We went to Unity, N.H., just in case people missed the point,” Mr. Obama said. “I saw the grace and the energy with which she threw herself into my campaign.”  Mrs. Clinton spoke before the president, an unusual departure from how she appears at events with high-powered surrogates, and at times it felt like she was campaigning not for herself, but for Mr. Obama’s legacy, praising his “heart, depth and humility.”  She repeatedly referred to their former rivalry, even praising Mr. Obama’s political deftness at defeating her. “He knows a thing or two about winning elections, take it from me,” she said.  The F.B.I.’s decision not to recommend criminal charges came days after an unplanned, brief meeting between former President Bill Clinton and Attorney General Loretta Lynch at an airport in Phoenix. To avoid any appearance of political interference, Ms. Lynch said Friday that she would accept the recommendations of career prosecutors and the F.B.I. director on whether to bring charges against Mrs. Clinton.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Saturday, Mrs. Clinton and her lawyers met with officials from the F.B.I. and the Justice Department to answer nearly four hours of questioning related to her email server.  Aides to both Democrats said Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton did not discuss the F.B.I. investigation on the flight to Charlotte. A spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, Nick Merrill, added that Mr. Obama looked at photos of Mrs. Clinton’s grandchildren aboard Air Force One.  Serving as Mr. Obama’s secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton engendered good will with the White House, and the experience of accepting Mr. Obama’s offer to run the State Department became one of the most popular stories she relayed on the campaign trail, particularly when wooing black voters.  Mrs. Clinton also fired away at Mr. Trump, saying that Mr. Obama was “someone who has never forgotten where he came from — and Donald, if you’re out there tweeting, it’s Hawaii,” a reference to Mr. Trump’s calls in 2011 for the president to produce his birth certificate.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  For several attendees, many of whom waited for hours in sweltering conditions to get into the rally, the chief draw was the chance to glimpse Mr. Obama as he sets off on something of a farewell tour.  The crowd was heavily African-American, flashing clothing and trinkets dedicated to the sitting president. Vendors sold tote bags and T-shirts emblazoned with images of Mr. Obama’s teenage daughters, and T-shirts promising to continue Mr. Obama’s historic 2008 victory by electing the first female president.  “It was on my bucket list,” Ivy Dunn, 69, said of seeing him.  Asked if she thought Mrs. Clinton could be as effective in office, Ms. Dunn paused. “I’m not going to say yes,” she said, “but she’ll be good.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton will need to nurture Mr. Obama and his supporters, particularly after she strayed to the left of his policies during her nominating fight on issues like the Trans Pacific Partnership trade deal and the Keystone XL Pipeline. A majority — 51 percent — of Americans approve of the president, according to a recent Gallup poll.  As Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton touched down at the Charlotte airport, and strode off Air Force One together in a sign of solidarity, a reporter asked John D. Podesta, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign chairman and a former White House chief of staff to Mr. Obama, whether the F.B.I. announcement overshadowed the rally.  He replied with a single word: “Hardly.”
Deeply confident that she would perform better as the president than as a political candidate, Mrs. Clinton wants to pursue a whole new approach at the White House to try to break through years of partisan gridlock, according to a dozen campaign advisers and allies who described her goals and outlook. From policy goals and personnel to her instinct for patiently cultivating the enemy, Mrs. Clinton thinks she would be a better dealmaker than President Obama if she finds willing partners on the other side.  Photo  Her opening might be a narrow one. She faces skepticism on the right about her willingness to compromise and her potential use of executive actions, and there is outright suspicion on the left that she might sell out progressive goals for the sake of bipartisan action with Republicans.  Still, Democrats close to her say she has a real touch with power brokers in both parties that could yield surprising results.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Her greatest strength is that she really listens to people, she understands what their political and policy needs are, and she tries to find that space where you can compromise,” said Neera Tanden, a former top domestic policy adviser to Mrs. Clinton who is now the president of the Center for American Progress, a left-leaning policy institute.  “To be crystal clear: She has led many battles where you can’t compromise on principle,” Ms. Tanden added. “But she also loves socializing, loves having people and spouses over, and really loves talking over drinks.”  Working With G.O.P.  In May, The New York Times examined Donald J. Trump’s plans for his first 100 days, during which he said he would focus on divisive campaign promises like building a border wall with Mexico. By contrast, The Times found in its reporting on plans for Mrs. Clinton’s 100 days that she would look to push issues that might be broadly popular, like infrastructure jobs and a breakthrough on immigration.  Hillary Clinton’s Plans for Her First 100 Days  Her calculation is that she will be dealing with a Republican Party that is deeply fractured and demoralized after the defeat of Mr. Trump, whose leaders will be searching for ways to show they can govern and to court Hispanics if Mr. Trump loses badly with them. Mrs. Clinton also thinks a huge Democratic turnout this fall would put the Senate back in her party’s hands, while Speaker Paul D. Ryan and the Republicans would have a reduced majority in the House.  What Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Clinton do not know — but regularly explore in conversations, according to friends — is whether Republican leaders, even if their power is diminished, would be in a mood to cooperate.  Mrs. Clinton has been a lightning rod for their base for two decades. Much of her budget plan — about $1.4 trillion in new spending over the next decade and $1.2 trillion in tax increases aimed mostly at the wealthy, according to a recent independent report — is noxious to House and Senate Republicans.  Yet some of them are open to her two early priorities: $275 billion in infrastructure spending, and an immigration bill with a path to citizenship like the one already passed by the Senate. Given how deeply immigration has divided the Republican Party, no other issue would probably reveal more about the ability of a President Hillary Clinton and a Republican-led House to work together.  “Pro-amnesty Republicans may use Hillary’s election as a pretext to do a deal,” said Mark Krikorian, the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates a tough stance on illegal immigration. “Or maybe Republicans will grow a spine because she is so repellent and they’ll want to show that the Republican Party is still alive and willing to be a line of defense against Hillary.”  Allies of Mrs. Clinton’s say they could imagine her, as president-elect, going to Mr. Ryan’s office this year to start talking about immigration. She believes in gestures: When Mrs. Clinton was working on the health care overhaul bill during President Bill Clinton’s first term, John Kasich, then a ranking Republican on the House Budget Committee, asked one of her aides if Mrs. Clinton would ever consider coming over to Capitol Hill to talk to Republicans about her ideas.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I said I’d ask her, and she was eager to go, which I think shows a willingness to get things done,” said the aide, Melanne Verveer, who became Mrs. Clinton’s White House chief of staff.  But many Republicans are not sure how she would use power, given that they think she abused her authority and was overly secretive by using a private email server as secretary of state. Mrs. Clinton has already indicated that she is willing to take executive action on issues if Republicans do not work with her, like expanding background checks for gun sales and ending corporate inversions aimed at avoiding taxes. Executive actions were a flash point between Mr. Obama and Republicans; several said Mrs. Clinton would have a hard time getting them over for cocktails if she shoved executive actions down their throats.  “She can be extremely charming, and she can be the opposite,” said Tom Davis, a former senior House Republican from Virginia. “But I think she’ll want to build some bridges right away and get back some of the trust that’s been missing between the parties for the last 15 years.”  Allies of the House and Senate Republican leaders said they would be more inclined to work with a President Hillary Clinton if she showed a willingness to compromise on priorities for many fiscal conservatives like overhauling Social Security. Yet Mrs. Clinton, like many in her party, opposes Republican proposals to cut benefits and raise the retirement age, and she has said she is open to raising the cap on income subject to Social Security taxes. Should she deviate from those positions, leaders of liberal groups — not to mention her primary race opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, and his full-throated supporters — would pounce on her.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “She’s campaigning on expanding Social Security, not cutting it,” said Ilya Sheyman, the executive director of MoveOn.org, a progressive organizing group that endorsed Mr. Sanders in the primaries. “It will be incumbent on a President Clinton very early in 2017 to force Republicans to accept big, bold ideas or else have them pay the consequences.”  Liberal Pressure  Some liberals think Mr. Trump will be so destructive to the Republican Party that it will be severely weakened after the November election — and that Mrs. Clinton, as the Democratic leader, should keep her boot on its neck rather than try to play nice and find compromises. Mr. Sanders remains worried that she would abandon progressive ideals to do business with Republicans and has yet to endorse her. Mrs. Clinton has spoken intensely about progressive policies, but she has long wanted to erase the caricature of herself as a partisan warrior — a “feminazi,” as one 1990s phrase went.  She hopes to reassure progressives with her executive actions, which would also include new protections for undocumented immigrant parents, as well as her personnel appointments. Having women make up half of her cabinet would be historic (in recent years, a quarter to a third of cabinet positions have been held by women), and Democrats close to Mrs. Clinton say she may decide to retain Ms. Lynch, the nation’s first black woman to be attorney general, who took office in April 2015.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  These Democrats, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential conversations with Mrs. Clinton and her advisers, said that Mr. Podesta, her campaign chairman, would have the right of first refusal on becoming her chief of staff, a job he held under Mr. Clinton. If he turns it down, Mrs. Clinton would look at appointing a woman to that job, which has been held only by men.  “There’s that old saying, ‘Nothing about us without us,’” said Jennifer Granholm, a former Democratic governor of Michigan who supports Mrs. Clinton. “I mean, a woman as chief of staff, Treasury secretary, a woman at Defense — it would be incredible.” (Ms. Granholm is often mentioned as a possible cabinet pick for the Energy Department or another post, but she waved off a question about her interest.)  Mrs. Clinton has assigned three top aides — Ann O’Leary, Ed Meier and Sara Latham — to oversee transition planning, reporting to Mr. Podesta. Clinton advisers say they do not expect Mr. Clinton to be constantly visible in the early months beyond whatever duties Mrs. Clinton gives him on economic policy and foreign affairs. The Clintons’ priority is that he does not do anything that distracts from her agenda or overshadows her as the country gets used to having a former president (and a man) in the role of first spouse.  One role he will be welcome to play is as an icebreaker at the Oval Office happy hour.  Mrs. Clinton’s ability to use alcohol as a political lubricant came up repeatedly when allies and advisers were asked how she might work with Republicans. Her tale about a drinking contest with Senator John McCain of Arizona is now a Washington legend. (She said they called it quits before things got out of hand.) She believes that a relaxed, frank discussion is more authentic than trying to bond awkwardly with adversaries over sports — and more productive than keeping them at arm’s length, as Mr. Obama has often done.  “She likes to cajole, she likes to make deals, and she likes to make friends,” said Richard Socarides, a former policy adviser to Bill Clinton and a longtime supporter of Mrs. Clinton. “And she knows it’s much harder to go after someone who you basically like, who you’ve had a drink with.”
The attorney general’s response did little to quell a political tempest in Washington, with some Republicans calling for her to recuse herself from the case — a step she said she was not going to take. Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, said the meeting had “opened up a Pandora’s box.” He cast doubt on whether it was entirely social, citing it as an example of how “the special interests are controlling your government.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For Democrats, already anxious about the political impact of the email investigation, the incident revived fears that Mr. Clinton could become a rogue actor in a campaign that has so far operated more smoothly than Mrs. Clinton’s presidential bid in 2008.  Mr. Clinton, who was on a seven-state fund-raising swing for his wife, strode across the tarmac at the airport in Phoenix to greet Ms. Lynch after her plane landed there on Monday night. The attorney general joked that she should have acted more swiftly to keep him from boarding. Asked by a journalist to name one thing she wished her predecessor, Eric H. Holder Jr., had told her about her job, she replied, “Where the lock on the plane door was.”  Still, Ms. Lynch said the episode was personally distressing because it stained the reputation of the Justice Department. “The fact that the meeting that I had is now casting a shadow over how people are going to view that work is something that I take seriously, and deeply and painfully,” she said.  Even Ms. Lynch’s explanation of how she planned to distance herself from the case — without recusing herself — required further clarification. “The case will be resolved by the team that’s been working on it from the beginning,” she said in Aspen. But a Justice Department spokeswoman, Melanie Newman, noted afterward that even if Ms. Lynch accepted the recommendation of her staff, she would be the one making the decision.  “She’s the head of the department,” Ms. Newman said, “and with that comes ultimate responsibility for any decision.”  The White House declined to comment on Ms. Lynch’s decision. President Obama “believes that this matter should be handled without regard to politics,” the press secretary, Josh Earnest, said.  The F.B.I. is investigating whether Mrs. Clinton, her aides or anyone else broke the law by setting up a private email server for her to use as secretary of state. Internal investigators have concluded that the server was used to send classified information. For the Justice Department, the central question is whether the conduct met the legal standard for the crime of mishandling classified information.  Ms. Lynch, whom Mr. Clinton appointed to be a United States attorney in 1999, said that the meeting with the former president was unplanned and largely social, and did not touch on the email investigation.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “He said hello and we basically said hello, and congratulated him on his grandchildren, as people do,” said Ms. Lynch, who was traveling with her husband. “That led to a conversation about those grandchildren.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For Mr. Clinton, who travels frequently by private jet, such airport socializing is common. Last month, he ran into Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, after speaking at the funeral of Muhammad Ali in Louisville, Ky. The two chatted before their planes took off. He has also greeted Representative Paul D. Ryan, the House speaker, and Arnold Schwarzenegger, the former Republican governor of California, on the tarmac. And in Mobile, Ala., he chatted with Senator Ted Cruz, the Texas Republican who has called for Mrs. Clinton’s imprisonment.  This meeting, however, created a particularly awkward situation for Ms. Lynch, a veteran prosecutor who was nominated from outside Washington’s political circles. During her confirmation, her allies sought to contrast her with her predecessor, Mr. Holder, an outspoken liberal voice who clashed frequently with Republicans who accused him of politicizing the office.  Ms. Lynch’s reassurance that she will not overrule her investigators is significant. When the F.B.I. sought to bring felony charges against David H. Petraeus, the former C.I.A. director, for mishandling classified information and lying about it, Mr. Holder stepped in and reduced the charge to a misdemeanor. That decision opened a deep — and public — rift.  Two other political appointees will review the findings of the email investigation before a final decision is made: John P. Carlin, the assistant attorney general for national security, and Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates. But both have also pledged to follow the recommendations of the career prosecutors and the F.B.I., Ms. Newman said.  The F.B.I. is expected to make a recommendation to the Justice Department in the coming weeks, though agents have yet to interview Mrs. Clinton. While some legal experts said they believed that criminal indictments in the case were unlikely, the investigation continues to cast a shadow over Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign.  Beyond the day-to-day workings of the Justice Department, there is precedent for relying on career officials to make politically charged decisions. When the Justice Department was considering whether to recommend sanctions against former Bush administration lawyers who approved waterboarding, Mr. Holder relied on his most senior career prosecutor to make the decision. No sanctions were recommended.  For Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign, the incident in Phoenix resurrected questions about how the campaign would rein in her irrepressible husband.  With approval ratings among Democrats of over 60 percent, Mr. Clinton is one of his wife’s most potent surrogates. He has traversed the country with a breakneck schedule, campaigning and raising money for Mrs. Clinton, traveling with a bare-bones staff and security detail.  Mr. Clinton and his chief of staff, Tina Flournoy, are in frequent contact with John D. Podesta, chairman of the Clinton campaign, and Robby Mook, the campaign manager. He often listens in on campaign conference calls from the family’s home in Chappaqua, N.Y. But his unpredictable and sociable nature can also cause problems for his wife’s candidacy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  David Axelrod, the former senior adviser to Mr. Obama, said on Twitter that he took Mr. Clinton and Ms. Lynch “at their word” that they had not discussed the investigation, but added that it was “foolish to create such optics.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton and her advisers have offered a series of explanations over the last year for her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state, a decision that she said again on Thursday had been “a mistake.”  She did not want the inconvenience of carrying two phones, Mrs. Clinton said initially. She did not want a government account that might pull in nonwork matters, she said later. Or perhaps, an adviser has said, she simply did not want Republican lawmakers rifling through her personal emails.  Yet another explanation emerged Thursday: She was not comfortable with using a computer to read email.  Lewis A. Lukens, a former State Department administrative official, said in a sworn deposition last week that after Mrs. Clinton became secretary of state in 2009, he had proposed accommodating her by setting up a desktop computer in her office that would not be connected to the department’s system. That would have allowed her to send and receive email on a personal account, Mr. Lukens said in the deposition, which he gave as part of a lawsuit brought by Judicial Watch, a conservative legal advocacy group. The group released a transcript of the deposition on Thursday.  But that idea was abandoned, Mr. Lukens testified, after an aide to the secretary told him that Mrs. Clinton was “very comfortable checking her emails on a BlackBerry, but she’s not adept or not used to checking her emails on a desktop.”  His explanation will not be the last word. Nor will a highly critical report that came out Wednesday from the State Department’s inspector general, which challenged many of the explanations Mrs. Clinton and her supporters have offered over the past year.  While the report said that Mrs. Clinton had never been authorized to set up a private email server and that her decision to use one had compromised security at the department she ran, it left a number of questions unanswered. One was why she had decided to use her own server, and ultimately risk damage to her political career, in the first place.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And it raised new questions, including why Mrs. Clinton had declined to speak with the investigators who prepared the report.  Asked about that decision in an interview with ABC News on Thursday, Mrs. Clinton said only that she had already testified for 11 hours before the select House committee investigating the attacks in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012, and that she had offered repeatedly to speak with the F.B.I.  “I have talked about this for many, many months,” she said.  She sounded exasperated by her inability to move past the controversy and defended her actions as common practice at the State Department, even as she again acknowledged that the private server had been a mistake.  “As I’ve said many times, if I could go back, I would do it differently,” she said. “I know people have concerns about this. I understand that, but I think voters are going to be looking at the full picture of what I have to offer, my life and my service.”  Mrs. Clinton said once again that the arrangement had been “allowed” at the time, though the inspector general’s report said that she had not sought permission and that it would not have been granted because of security concerns.  She also said that her use of a nonofficial email address had been “widely known,” though the report said the extent of her use had not been known beyond a small number of officials who were privy to her private accounts.  At the State Department on Thursday, a spokesman, Mark C. Toner, faced repeated questions about why the department had not done more to ensure that Mrs. Clinton’s email arrangement complied with department rules and federal laws. “There was only a partial understanding of how much Secretary Clinton relied on personal email, and we just did not have a complete picture,” he said.  According to the inspector general’s report, two records information officials in the department raised concerns as early as 2010 that emails sent and received on Mrs. Clinton’s server might contain information that should be preserved under federal law.  Related Coverage  Their superior told them that the arrangement had been reviewed and approved, though the inspector general found “no evidence” that this had happened. The supervisor told them their job was to support the secretary and “instructed the staff never to speak of the secretary’s personal email system again.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The report did not name the supervisor, but several people with knowledge of the episode identified him as John Bentel, the former director of information resource management in the State Department’s Executive Secretariat office. Randall J. Turk, a lawyer for Mr. Bentel, declined to comment Thursday.  Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, mentioned Mr. Bentel’s role in remarks Thursday on the Senate floor, and complained that Mr. Bentel had refused a request to speak with the committee.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Good and honest employees just trying to do their job were told to shut up and sit down,” Mr. Grassley said. “Concerns about the secretary’s email system being out of compliance with federal record-keeping laws were swept under the rug.”  He also said Mr. Bentel had warned Mrs. Clinton that any emails that passed through the State Department’s systems would be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act.  For Mrs. Clinton, the biggest obstacle to getting past the email controversy is the F.B.I., which has not yet completed its criminal investigation to determine whether any laws were broken in the handling of classified material or other matters relating to the emails. Mrs. Clinton is expected to be interviewed as part of the investigation, but it is not clear when that will happen.  The investigation could drag past the Democratic National Convention this summer and what is expected to be the kickoff to Mrs. Clinton’s general-election campaign against Donald J. Trump. In the meantime, depositions will continue in the Judicial Watch suit. Cheryl D. Mills, a longtime confidante of Mrs. Clinton who was her counselor at the State Department, is scheduled to testify on Friday, and at least a half-dozen other former officials are scheduled to follow.
“The United States has much greater capacity,” she said, seeming to threaten that the United States could respond in kind. She appeared to be referring to Washington’s offensive cyberability, made clear in the American attacks on Iran’s nuclear program, code-named “Olympic Games,” which played out while she was secretary of state. Again, the United States has never admitted to that cyberoffensive action.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump seemed to try to deflect responsibility away from Moscow. “It could be Russia,” he said, “but it could also be China.” United States intelligence officials disagree: This most recent round of attacks, they concluded with “high confidence,” indeed originated from Russia.  —David E. Sanger  _____  On Mr. Trump saying the Islamic State would never have come into power if the United States had stayed in Iraq.  The assertion is impossible to disprove, but it’s unlikely that 10,000 troops remaining in Iraq would have made much of a difference — especially in Syria and Libya, where the United States never had troops.  —David E. Sanger  _____  On Mr. Trump saying that the United States should have taken Iraq’s oil.  It is an assertion that he made a few weeks ago, and one that was roundly criticized at the time. Seizing Iraq’s oil — or the resources of any country — is illegal under international law, and doing so would have likely prompted condemnation from around the world. In purely practical terms, seizing Iraq’s oil would have required tens of thousands of American troops to protect Iraq’s oil infrastructure, which is spread out across the country and largely above ground. It also is probably safe to assume that Iraqis themselves would have objected to their country’s main source of wealth being used to enrich another country.  —Matthew Rosenberg  _____  On Mr. Trump’s accusation that the withdrawal of troops left a vacuum in Iraq and Syria, which allowed the Islamic State to take root.  In fact, Mrs. Clinton advocated arming moderate rebels in Syria and said afterward that Mr. Obama’s refusal to do so may have left a vacuum there. She also privately backed a Pentagon proposal to leave a larger residual force in Iraq than the administration ended up leaving.  —Mark Landler  _____  On Mr. Trump’s assertion that many NATO countries do not contribute their full share to NATO.  Mr. Trump was correct in asserting that many NATO countries do not contribute their full share to NATO — a complaint that Mr. Obama and a former secretary of defense, Robert Gates, have also voiced. But he was wrong about NATO failing to fight terrorism. NATO was in Afghanistan starting in 2003 — part of the battle against Al Qaeda.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  —David E. Sanger  _____  On Mr. Trump’s opposition to the Iraq war.  Mr. Trump said he opposed the war in Iraq before it began. But during the buildup to the war, he expressed his support in an interview with Howard Stern, according to audio unearthed by BuzzFeed.  —Steve Eder  _____  On Mrs. Clinton’s assertion that the United States needs an “intelligence surge” to help prevent terrorist attacks by homegrown violent extremists.  The United States already collects and shares more intelligence than ever. The F.B.I. has been successful in arresting suspects who are in contact with terrorist figures overseas. The greater challenge for law enforcement today is often that homegrown terrorists commit no crime until an attack. And the F.B.I. is not allowed to conduct open-ended investigations without evidence of criminal wrongdoing. Nor is it allowed to collect intelligence solely related to people’s views. Admiring Osama bin Laden or the Islamic State or expressing hatred for the United States is not a crime.  —Matt Apuzzo  _____  On Mr. Trump’s claim that the United States is “not updating” its nuclear arsenal and the Iran nuclear deal.  Mr. Trump is wrong. The United States has a major nuclear modernization program underway, at a cost of tens of billions of dollars. On the Iran nuclear deal, he complained that the United States paid $1.7 billion in cash to Iran. It did. But it was Iran’s money, for military goods never delivered to Iran after the Iranian Revolution. (The principal was $400 million; the remaining $1.3 billion was interest owed in the ensuing three decades.)  —David E. Sanger  Economy  On Mr. Trump saying that China is “devaluing their currency” to gain an economic advantage.  This is an outdated accusation. Countries that hold down the value of their currency can sell goods in other countries more cheaply. And many economists see evidence that China suppressed the value of its currency for years, contributing to its rise as an industrial power. But in recent years, China has sought to stabilize and even increase the value of its currency, part of a broader shift in its economic policies. There is no evidence that China is presently engaging in currency devaluation.  —Binyamin Appelbaum  _____  On Mr. Trump’s claim that Ford is leaving the United States and taking “thousands of jobs” with it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump described a dire situation for the United States’ industrial economy, saying that “Ford is leaving,” referring to the auto giant, and that “thousands of jobs are leaving Michigan, leaving Ohio. They’re all leaving.”  Ford is moving its manufacturing of many smaller cars to Mexico, but has said that the move will not result in job losses in the United States.  Ohio and Michigan have, indeed, suffered major manufacturing job losses over the past generation. But in the past year, Ohio has gained 78,300 jobs, and Michigan has gained 75,800 jobs. In August, the unemployment rate was 4.9 percent in Michigan and 4.7 percent in Ohio, both in line with the national rate.  —Neil Irwin  _____  Mrs. Clinton on Mr. Trump’s tax plan:  Mrs. Clinton said that Mr. Trump’s tax plan would increase the federal debt by “over $5 trillion,” and that it would penalize middle-income families.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The conservative Tax Foundation estimates that Mr. Trump’s plan would cost a minimum of $4.4 trillion. A liberal group, Citizens for Tax Justice, pegs the minimum cost at $4.8 trillion. But the final bill could be significantly greater. Mr. Trump has offered multiple versions of some elements of his plan. A tax break for small businesses, in particular, could add more than $1 trillion to the final bill.  The Trump campaign, however, insists that the final cost would be just $2.6 trillion. This is based on a stripped-down version of Mr. Trump’s plan — one that is inconsistent with his campaign’s public promises. It also assumes that lower tax rates would encourage much stronger economic growth, reducing the cost.  Would it hurt the middle class? Mr. Trump’s plan would reduce the average tax burden for low-income, middle-income and upper-income households — but it would not cut everyone’s taxes. Indeed, a new analysis finds roughly 7.8 million families with children would pay higher taxes under Mr. Trump’s plan.  —Binyamin Appelbaum  _____  On Mr. Trump and NAFTA:  Mr. Trump said that the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, “is the worst trade deal” in American history, and possibly in world history.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  More than 20 years after its passage, NAFTA remains a political lightning rod. But the evidence suggests it wasn’t a big deal in economic terms. Indeed, the Congressional Research Service concluded in 2015 that the “net overall effect of NAFTA on the U.S. economy appears to have been relatively modest.” The reason: Trade with Canada and Mexico comprises a small portion of American economic activity.  —Binyamin Appelbaum  _____  On Mr. Trump’s claim that “we have a trade deficit of almost $800 billion a year,” blaming trade deals for this.  He has the number wrong. The United States trade deficit was about $500 billion in 2015, and is on track for a similar number this year. He is likely referring to the trade deficit in goods, which was $762 billion last year. But that was counteracted by a $262 billion surplus in services.  In other words, while the United States imports more physical goods than it exports, it exports more services, including things like financial services, tourism, and software.  —Neil Irwin  _____    On Mr. Trump and the Federal Reserve.  Mr. Trump said the Federal Reserve is “doing political things” by holding interest rates at a low level. He charged that the Fed would raise rates as soon as Mr. Obama left office.  This is a baseless accusation. The Fed has held borrowing costs at historically low levels since the financial crisis to encourage economic growth. Some Fed officials would like to raise rates slightly. Some want to wait a little longer. But Fed officials are uniform in dismissing the idea that politics is playing a role in this debate, and outside experts see no evidence that the Fed is misleading the public.  In attacking the Fed, Mr. Trump is plowing across a line that presidential candidates and presidents have observed for the past several decades. There has been a bipartisan consensus that central banks operate most effectively when they are shielded from short-term political pressures. Indeed, President Richard M. Nixon’s insistence that the Fed should not raise rates in the early 1970s played a role in unleashing a long era of inflation — and in convincing his successors that it was better to leave the Fed to its technocratic devices.  —Binyamin Appelbaum  _____  On Mrs. Clinton’s changing position on the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton said she had “hoped it would be a good deal” but that when it was negotiated, she did not agree with the terms. In fact, Mrs. Clinton spoke out more than 40 times in favor of the trade deal, saying it would be a “strategic initiative that would strengthen the position of the United States in Asia,” without making her support contingent on how it would turn out.  —Mark Landler  Energy and the Environment  On Mrs. Clinton’s accusation that Mr. Trump said climate change was a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese.  Mr. Trump responded, “I do not say that.”  But in 2012, Mr. Trump tweeted, “The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing noncompetitive.” Over the past year, Mr. Trump has repeatedly called climate change a hoax, and said that he is “not a believer” in the established science of human-caused climate change.  —Coral Davenport  The Candidates  On Mr. Trump’s loan from his father.  Mrs. Clinton said it was $14 million in loans from Mr. Trump’s father that helped him get his real estate business off the ground. Mr. Trump said it was just a “small” loan. A recent Wall Street Journal article notes a series of loans and gifts that Mr. Trump received from his father, citing a casino disclosure document from 1985 showing that Mr. Trump owed his father and his father’s company about $14 million.  —Steve Eder  _____  On Mr. Trump’s claims that the 2008 Clinton campaign was behind questions of President Obama’s birthplace.  In defending himself for raising questions about Mr. Obama’s birthplace, Mr. Trump said that Mrs. Clinton’s confidant Sidney Blumenthal pushed those questions on a McClatchy reporter when Obama was running for president in 2008.  A former McClatchy journalist has said that Mr. Blumenthal encouraged him in 2008 to explore Mr. Obama’s connections to Kenya, including whether he was born there, but Mr. Blumenthal has flatly denied this.  —Megan Twohey  _____  On Mr. Trump’s comments toward women:  At the end of the debate, Mrs. Clinton slammed Mr. Trump for comments he made about a former Miss Universe, Alicia Machado, pointing out that he had called her “Miss Piggy” and “Miss Housekeeping.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump expressed confusion as to where those comments came from, but Ms. Machado has shared them in multiple interviews this year and Mr. Trump himself has admitted that he openly pushed her to lose weight when he took over the Miss Universe pageant.  —Megan Twohey  Crime  On Mr. Trump’s statements on “stop-and-frisk.”  Mr. Trump objected to Lester Holt’s characterization that “stop-and-frisk,” the New York Police Department practice targeting minority and high-crime areas for searching people, had been found to be unconstitutional racial profiling. Mr. Trump said that the judge who issued that ruling had the case taken away from her, and that New York’s new mayor had opted not to go forward with defending the policy.  Both Mr. Holt’s and Mr. Trump’s statements are true. In 2013, a federal judge in New York, Shira A. Scheindlin, struck down the practice as unconstitutional, citing data showing that blacks and Hispanics were being disproportionately stopped. Michael R. Bloomberg, then the mayor, appealed the ruling.  Later in 2013, a federal appeals court removed Judge Scheindlin from the case. But then Bill de Blasio became mayor, dropped the litigation and repudiated the policy, mooting the litigation before it could be resolved at a higher level.  —Charlie Savage  _____  On Mr. Trump’s claims that murders are up in New York City.  Mrs. Clinton said they are down. Mrs. Clinton is correct. Crime statistics show that murders are down year on year, to 246 from 257. A spokesman for the New York Police Department weighed in on Twitter to say that murders and shootings are down significantly. “#NYC is on pace to have one of the safest years on record for crime.”  —Steve Eder
Video  PHILADELPHIA — Hillary Clinton, in accepting her party’s presidential nomination, described her love of tough issues, saying bluntly that “I sweat the details of policy.”  But she delivered a speech that was remarkably without hard facts.  Much of her address was a mix of descriptions of her upbringing, assertions of her opinions and generalized attacks on Donald J. Trump. She talked about marching “toward a more perfect union” and said Mr. Trump “doesn’t like talking about his plans.”  And even when she said “I love talking about mine,” she offered few concrete numbers or assertions to examine. Instead, she spoke in general terms about making “college tuition-free for the middle class” and giving “a boost” to small businesses.  There were, however, a few factual assertions that could be checked — so we did:  CLAIM: “Children like Ryan kept me going when our plan for universal health care failed, and kept me working with leaders of both parties to help create the Children’s Health Insurance Program that covers eight million kids in our country.”  FACT CHECK: This is true. Mrs. Clinton has at times claimed full credit for the program. But by saying in the speech that she “worked with leaders of both parties to help create” the program, her statement fits with the facts. And the health insurance program does currently serve 8.1 million children, according to Medicaid.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  _______  CLAIM: “Our economy is so much stronger than when they took office. Nearly 15 million new private-sector jobs.”  FACT CHECK: This is true. Since early 2010, when the economy stopped losing jobs every month, 14.8 million jobs have been added in the longest streak of private-sector job growth in history. Critics say job growth would have been higher if a different set of economic policies were in place, but that is impossible to prove.  _______  CLAIM: There are now “20 million more Americans with health insurance.”  FACT CHECK: This is largely true. According to a recent report by the Department of Health and Human Services, about 20 million Americans have gained health coverage under the Affordable Care Act from its passage in 2010 to early 2016. However, critics argue that the law has caused premiums to rise, sometimes drastically for people who already had health insurance.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  _______  CLAIM: There is now “an auto industry that just had its best year ever.”  FACT CHECK: This is largely true. Auto sales in the United States reached a new high in 2015, with about 17.4 million vehicles sold. That represented a 5.8 percent increase from 2014. But the auto industry has changed significantly. Detroit’s Big Three automakers have a much lower market share than they once did. Auto manufacturing also employs fewer people than it used to, although there have been gains since the Great Recession.  _______  CLAIM: “More than 90 percent of the gains have gone to the top 1 percent.”  FACT CHECK: This depends on the time frame you consider. From 2009 to 2012, the top 1 percent of families captured 91 percent of total real family income growth, according to Emmanuel Saez, an economist at the University of California, Berkeley. But over a longer period of time, the picture looks less lopsided: From 2009 to 2015, 52 percent of the income gains went to the top 1 percent, according to Mr. Saez.  _______  CLAIM: “In Atlantic City, 60 miles from here, you will find contractors and small businesses who lost everything because Donald Trump refused to pay his bills.”  FACT CHECK: This is true. Several news organizations have documented many specific instances where contractors say Mr. Trump or his organization refused to pay them for work they had done, in Atlantic City and elsewhere. Mr. Trump and his representatives say that if those payments were not made, it was because the work that was done was unsatisfactory.  _______  CLAIM: “Trump suits in Mexico, not Michigan. Trump furniture in Turkey, not Ohio. Trump picture frames in India, not Wisconsin.”  FACT CHECK: This is partly true, though without much context. Fact-checkers have found several examples of Trump clothing like suits, ties and shirts that have labels showing they were made in places like Mexico, Bangladesh and China.  But some have labels showing they were made in the United States, and as of 2014, the clothing and footwear association reported that 97 percent of all clothing and 98 percent of all footwear was imported from overseas. Some of Mr. Trump’s furniture is made in Turkey.
Video  CLEVELAND — Donald J. Trump’s acceptance speech here was filled with Trump-like hyperbole and the kind of vague political rhetoric that is hard to pin down.  But there were also facts.  In describing the problems that he would seek to fix from the Oval Office, Mr. Trump offered a series of grim facts about crime, the economy, and foreign policy. “Here at our convention, there will be no lies,” Mr. Trump said.  Many of Mr. Trump’s facts appear to be true, though the Republican presidential nominee sometimes failed to offer the entire story, or provide all of the context that might help to explain his numbers.  And in some cases, the facts seemed inflated or misleading, part of a broader ideological message that Mr. Trump was hoping to convey.  Our fact-checks of some of his claims:  • “Homicides last year increased by 17 percent in America’s fifty largest cities. That’s the largest increase in 25 years.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Fact Check: Those statistics are based on one analysis of preliminary crime data released by the Justice Department, and they accurately reflect what officials say is a spike in murders in some big cities. It leaves out the drop in others, like New York City, which saw a 25 percent drop in homicides in the first three months of 2016.  _____  • “In our nation’s capital, killings have risen by 50 percent. They are up nearly 60 percent in nearby Baltimore.”  Fact Check: Those statistics are based on an analysis performed by The Washington Post, which found no clear pattern in which cities saw increases in homicides.  _____  • “In the president’s hometown of Chicago, more than 2,000 have been the victims of shootings this year alone. And almost 4,000 have been killed in the Chicago area since he took office.”  Fact Check: This is largely true. The Chicago police department reports 2,242 shootings so far in 2016. And while it is unclear exactly what Mr. Trump means by “the Chicago area,” that figure appears to track with reported murders since the start of 2009.  _____  • “The number of police officers killed in the line of duty has risen by almost 50 percent compared to this point last year.”  Fact Check: In fact, the Officer Down Memorial Page, which tracks officer deaths, reports that 68 police officers have been killed so far this year, almost exactly the same as the 69 who were killed in the same period last year.  _____  • “Nearly 180,000 illegal immigrants with criminal records, ordered deported from our country, are tonight roaming free to threaten peaceful citizens.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Fact Check: Those numbers come from a report by the Department of Homeland Security, which told Congress late last year that nearly 1 million undocumented immigrants have been ordered deported but remain in the country. Mr. Trump did not mention that most of those 180,000 are likely people charged with nonviolent crimes.  Video  _____  • “The number of new illegal immigrant families who have crossed the border so far this year already exceeds the entire total from 2015.”  Fact Check: This is true, according to reports from the Border Patrol, which said that more than 51,000 families have been apprehended on the border in the first nine months of the fiscal year, compared to about 40,000 last fiscal year. But that is still less than 2014, when a surge of families across the border caused a political stir.  _____  • “Nearly four in 10 African-American children are living in poverty, while 58 percent of African-American youth are not employed.”  Fact Check: According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the unemployment rate of African Americans ages 16-19 in June was 31.2 percent (among whites of the same age, it was 14.1 percent).  _____  • “Household incomes are down more than $4,000 since the year 2000.”  Fact Check: This is mostly true. Median household income in 2000 was $57,724; in 2014, which has the most recent available data, it was $53,657.  _____  • “Our manufacturing trade deficit has reached an all-time high – nearly $800 billion in a single year.”  Fact Check: The goods deficit — more imported goods, less exported goods — was $763 billion last year. But that includes agricultural products and raw materials like coal. Moreover, the total trade deficit last year was only $500 billion because the U.S. runs a trade surplus in services.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  _____  • “President Obama has doubled our national debt to more than $19 trillion, and growing.”  Fact Check: The national debt was $10.6 trillion on the day Obama took office. It was $19.2 trillion in April, so not quite double, but close.  _____  • “Forty-three million Americans are on food stamps.”  Fact Check: As of October, this figure was largely accurate, according to the United States Department of Agriculture.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  _____  • “In 2009, pre-Hillary, ISIS was not even on the map. Libya was cooperating. Egypt was peaceful. Iraq was seeing and, really, a big, big reduction in violence. Iran was being choked by sanctions. Syria was under control.”  Fact Check: Mr. Trump is mostly right. But Libya, Syria and Egypt were swept up in the Arab Spring, an uprising out of Mrs. Clinton’s and Mr. Obama’s control. And the sanctions on Iran were just getting ramped up at that time; they became far tougher under the Obama administration than they were during the Bush administration. That helped force Tehran to the negotiating table for last year’s deal.  _____  • “This was just prior to the signing of the Iran deal, which gave back to Iran $150 billion and gave us nothing — it will go down in history as one of the worst deals ever negotiated.”  Fact Check: The deal does not directly give Iran money, but by easing or terminating sanctions, it would allow Iran to have access to many billions of dollars of its own money that has been frozen in overseas accounts. And the exact value of those sanctions is debatable.  _____  • “My opponent has called for a radical 550 percent increase in Syrian refugees on top of existing massive refugee flows coming into our country under the leadership of President Obama.”  Fact Check: This is true, as Mrs. Clinton said in September she wanted to “move from what is a good start with 10,000 to 65,000.” But she also said she would improve the already extensive vetting process, especially from Syria.
Photo  After the mass shooting at a movie theater in Colorado, Senator Bernie Sanders said that gun control was a matter best left resolved in state capitals.  In the aftermath of the massacre at an elementary school in Connecticut, Mr. Sanders voiced support for new gun control measures, but also noted that the rights of law-abiding gun owners “must be protected.”  In fact, Mr. Sanders sounded downright skeptical of the push for tighter new laws.  “If you passed the strongest gun control legislation tomorrow, I don’t think it will have a profound effect on the tragedies we have seen,” he told Seven Days, an alternative weekly in Vermont.  Mr. Sanders’s statements on gun control, while less forceful than those of some other Democrats, did not seem out of place for a senator from a state where hunting is prevalent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But with last week’s mass shooting at a community college in Oregon stirring debate about America’s gun laws, Mr. Sanders’s attitudes toward gun control and the Second Amendment are facing fresh scrutiny as his presidential bid gains steam.  While Mr. Sanders has outflanked Hillary Rodham Clinton by appealing to liberals, his record on gun-related issues could be a potential vulnerability in a Democratic contest in which he is not accustomed to facing doubts about his liberal credentials.  Video  Campaigning in New Hampshire on Sunday, another Democratic rival, former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland, called on Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders to support a series of proposals he had laid out to address gun violence.  And on Monday, Mrs. Clinton detailed a gun control plan, a mix of legislative and executive action that included an expansion of background checks. “How much longer will we just shrug?” Mrs. Clinton asked at a town hall gathering in New Hampshire.  For Mrs. Clinton, the issue is an opportunity to present herself as the most proactive Democratic candidate on gun control, and provide a contrast with Mr. Sanders, who has been gaining on her in national polls.  Mr. Sanders, for his part, is trying to balance representing a state where guns are mainly used for recreation against the need to appeal to a Democratic electorate increasingly agitated over mass shootings and demanding stricter gun control laws.  As he focuses his message on economic inequality, Mr. Sanders has seemed less than eager to discuss the issue of gun control. At a rally on Saturday in Boston, he waited until an hour into his speech to allude to the Oregon massacre.  Mr. Sanders voted against the Brady Bill in the 1990s, requiring background checks, when he was in the House of Representatives. And in 2005, he voted in favor of a bill to shield gun manufacturers and dealers from lawsuits. (Mrs. Clinton, then a senator from New York, voted against that bill, and is pledging to repeal it as part of her gun control plan.)  After the Newtown, Conn., shootings, Mr. Sanders, by then a senator, voted for expanding background checks and banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  His positioning has not endeared him to those on either side of the issue. When he last ran for re-election in 2012, the National Rifle Association gave him a D-minus rating. This summer, a “super PAC” supporting Mr. O’Malley released an ad that concluded, “Bernie Sanders is no progressive when it comes to guns.”  “I think it’s a little bit unfair to call him pro-gun,” said Bertram Johnson, the chairman of the political science department at Middlebury College in Vermont. “I think it would be fairer to say he’s more in line with what the state thinks about this.”  Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, Jeff Weaver, defended the senator’s record on Monday, saying he has supported banning assault weapons and requiring background checks since he was first elected to Congress in 1990. Mr. Weaver added that Mr. Sanders opposed the Brady Bill because of the waiting period it imposed.  After the Oregon shootings, Mr. Sanders issued a statement calling for a “comprehensive approach” to deter mass killings, including “sensible gun-control legislation which prevents guns from being used by people who should not have them.”  In an interview on MSNBC, he took a pragmatic approach. He said the nation needed to “get beyond the shouting” on the issue of guns and added, “I don’t know that anybody knows what the magic solution is.”  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “You can sit there and say, well, I think we should do this and do that,” he said. “But you got a whole lot of states in this country where people want virtually no gun control at all. And if we are going to have some success, we are going to have to start talking to each other.”  In a statement on Monday, Mr. Sanders said his campaign was assembling a package of proposals to address gun violence. He expressed support for closing the so-called gun show loophole and for banning assault weapons, among other things.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Sanders has also tried to draw attention to the different role of guns in his state compared with more densely populated areas, where guns are often associated with violence, not recreation. “The people of my state understand, I think, pretty clearly, that guns in Vermont are not the same thing as guns in Chicago or guns in Los Angeles,” he said in July on CNN.  Vermont has a high level of gun ownership compared with other states in the Northeast. It also has some of the least restrictive gun laws in the country. At the same time, Vermont has few murders committed with firearms.  “It’s a different life situation up here, and I think Senator Sanders has tried to explain that,” said Evan Hughes, a vice president of the Vermont Federation of Sportsmen’s Clubs. “His voting record has reflected the Vermont reality.”  Ann Braden, the president of Gun Sense Vermont, a group that formed after the Newtown shootings and advocates new gun laws, said Mr. Sanders’s focus on keeping guns out of the wrong hands — but not attacking the mere idea of gun ownership — was “how you can actually make change.”  “There are many, many responsible gun owners,” she said, “and it’s important to have someone who understands that.”
(APPLAUSE)  And Governor John Kasich of Ohio.  (APPLAUSE)  Now, as most of you have heard by now, Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia died today at the age of 79. He was the longest-serving member of the court, appointed by President Reagan in 1986. Justice Scalia was the court’s leading conservative, and even those who disagreed with his opinions regarded him as a brilliant legal scholar. Please join us and the candidates on our stage in a moment of silence for Justice Antonin Scalia. Thank you.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  We will talk to the candidates about Justice Scalia and the road ahead when the debate begins in a moment.  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)  DICKERSON: Before we get started, candidates, here are the rules. When we ask you a question, you will have one minute to answer, and 30 seconds more if we ask a follow-up. If you’re attacked by another candidate, you get 30 seconds to respond.  And here’s how we keep time. After we ask a question, you’ll get a green light. The yellow light means you have 30 seconds left to finish your answer, and when time is up, the light turns red. That means please stop talking. If you keep talking, you’ll hear this.  (BELL RINGING)  You don’t want to hear that. Joining me in the questioning tonight, my CBS News colleague, chief White House correspondent Major Garrett, and Kimberley Strassel, who is on the editorial board of The Wall Street Journal.  And you can participate in the debate through our partnership with Twitter. Tweet us your questions and comments using the hashtag “#GOPDebate.”  So, let’s begin.  First, the death of Justice Scalia, and the vacancy that leaves on the Supreme Court. Mr. Trump, I want to start with you. You’ve said that the president shouldn’t nominate anyone in the rest of his term to replace Justice Scalia. If you were president and had a chance, with 11 months left to go in your term, wouldn’t it be an abdication, to conservatives in particular, not to name a conservative justice with the rest of your term?  TRUMP: Well, I can say this. If the president, and if I were president now, I would certainly want to try and nominate a justice. I’m sure that, frankly, I’m absolutely sure that President Obama will try and do it. I hope that our Senate is going to be able — Mitch, and the entire group, is going to be able to do something about it.  In times of delay, we could have a Diane Sykes, or you could have a Bill Pryor — we have some fantastic people. But this is a tremendous blow to conservatism. It’s a tremendous blow, frankly, to our country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  DICKERSON: So, just to be clear on this, Mr. Trump, you’re O.K. with the president nominating somebody ...  TRUMP: ... I think he’s going to do it whether or I’m O.K. with it or not. I think it’s up to Mitch McConnell and everybody else to stop it. It’s called delay, delay, delay.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Governor Kasich, I want to get your thoughts on this. Justice Scalia was a real believer, obviously, in the strict word of the Constitution. Now, Harry Reid says that a failure to fill his vacancy would be, quote, “shameful abdication of one of the Senate’s most essential constitutional responsibilities.”  Where do you come down on this?  KASICH: Well, John, first of all, if I were president, we wouldn’t have the divisions in the country we have today. I do want to take a second as we reflected on Judge Scalia, it’s amazing — it’s not even two minutes after the death of Judge Scalia, nine children here today, their father didn’t wake up. His wife, sad, but I just wish we hadn’t run so fast into politics.  Here’s my concern about this. The country is so divided right now, and now we’re going to see another partisan fight take place. I really wish the president would think about not nominating somebody. If you were to nominate somebody, let’s have him pick somebody that’s going to have unanimous approval, and such widespread approval across the country that this could happen without a lot of recrimination. I don’t think that’s going to happen, and I would like the president just to, for once here, put the country first. We’re going to have an election for president very soon, and the people will understand what is at stake in that election.  And so I believe the president should not move forward, and I think that we ought to let the next president of the United States decide who is going to run that Supreme Court with a vote by the people of the United...  (BELL RINGING)  KASICH: ... States of America.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Dr. Carson. Dr. Carson, you, like others, put out a statement after the death was announced, and you said the president should delay.  You’ve written a book on the Constitution recently. What does the Constitution say about whose duty it is here to act in this kind of a situation?  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  CARSON: Well, the current Constitution actually doesn’t address that particular situation, but the fact of the matter is the Supreme Court, obviously, is a very important part of our governmental system. And when our Constitution was put in place, the average age of death was under 50, and therefore the whole concept of lifetime appointments for Supreme Court judges and federal judges was not considered to be a big deal.  Obviously, that has changed, and it’s something that probably needs to be looked at pretty carefully at some point. But, we need to start thinking about the divisiveness that is going on in our country. I looked at some of the remarks that people made after finding out that Justice Scalia had died, and they were truly nasty remarks. And that we have managed to get to that position in our country is truly a shame. And we should be thinking about how we could create some healing in this land.  But, right now, we’re not going to get healing with President Obama. That’s very United Nations clear. So, I...  (BELL RINGING)  CARSON: ... fully agree that we should not allow a judge to be appointed during his time.  DICKERSON: Senator Rubio, you’re a...  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Senator Rubio, you’re a lawyer. Quickly, can you address the issue of whether the Constitution tells us who has the power to appoint Supreme Court justices?  And then, also, the Senate Republicans last year floated an idea of removing the filibuster for Senate — excuse me, for Supreme Court nominations. You seemed open to that. What’s your feeling on that now?  RUBIO: Well, let me first talk about Justice Scalia. His loss is tremendous, and obviously our hearts and prayers go out to his family. He will go down as one of the great justices in the history of this republic.  You talk about someone who defended consistently the original meaning of the Constitution, who understood that the Constitution was not there to be interpreted based on the fads of the moment, but it was there to be interpreted according to its original meaning.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Justice Scalia understood that better than anyone in the history of this republic. His dissent, for example, on the independent counsel case is a brilliant piece of jurist work. And, of course, his dissent on Obergefell as well.  No. 2, I do not believe the president should appoint someone. And it’s not unprecedented. In fact, it has been over 80 years since a lame duck president has appointed a Supreme Court justice.  And it remind us of this, how important this election is. Someone on this stage will get to choose the balance of the Supreme Court, and it will begin by filling this vacancy that’s there now.  And we need to put people on the bench that understand that the Constitution is not a living and breathing document. It is to be interpreted as originally meant.  DICKERSON: Quickly, though, on this question...  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Very quickly, Senator, on this specific question, though. You were once in favor of dropping the threshold...  (CROSSTALK)  RUBIO: That’s not accurate.  DICKERSON: ... majority — you were never in favor of that?  RUBIO: No, I’ve never — there has been, for example, today, according to the changes Harry Reid made, appellate judges can now be appointed by a simple majority, but not Supreme Court justices.  And I think today you see the wisdom of why we don’t want that to change. Because if that were the case and we were not in charge of the Senate, Harry Reid and Barack Obama would ram down our throat a liberal justice, like the ones Barack Obama has imposed on us already.  DICKERSON: O.K. Thank you, Senator.  Governor Bush, I would like to ask you, conservatives for a long time have felt like that their Republican presidents have picked justices that didn’t turn out to be real conservatives.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  BUSH: Right.  DICKERSON: Bernie Sanders has said he would have a litmus test. He would make sure that he appointed a justice who was going to overturn Citizens United. If they can have a litmus test for a nominee, what about you? Would you have a litmus test for a nominee? And what would it be?  BUSH: Not on specific issues, not at all. I think the next president — if I’m president, I will appoint people — I’ll nominate people that have a proven record in the judiciary.  The problem in the past has been we have appointed people thinking you can get it through the Senate because they didn’t have a record. And the problem is that sometimes we’re surprised.  The simple fact is the next president needs to appoint someone with a proven conservative record, similar to Justice Scalia, that is a lover of liberty, that believes in limited government, that consistently applied that kind of philosophy, that didn’t try to legislator from the bench, that was respectful of the Constitution.  And then fight and fight, and fight for that nomination to make sure that that nomination passes.  Of course, the president, by the way, has every right to nominate Supreme Court justices. I’m an Article II guy in the Constitution. We’re running for the president of the United States. We want a strong executive for sure. But in return for that, there should be a consensus orientation on that nomination, and there’s no doubt in my mind that Barack Obama will not have a consensus pick when he submits that person to the Senate.  DICKERSON: Right, so, Senator Cruz, the Constitution...  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: So, Senator Cruz, the Constitution says the president “shall appoint with advice and consent from the Senate,” just to clear that up. So he has the constitutional power. But you don’t think he should.  Where do you set that date if you’re president? Does it begin in election year, in December, November, September? And once you set the date, when you’re president, will you abide by that date?  CRUZ: Well, we have 80 years of precedent of not confirming Supreme Court justices in an election year. And let me say, Justice Scalia...  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  DICKERSON: Just can I — I’m sorry to interrupt, were any appointed in an election year, or is that just there were 80 years...  (CROSSTALK)  CRUZ: Eighty years of not confirming. For example, L.B.J. nominated Abe Fortas. Fortas did not get confirmed. He was defeated.  DICKERSON: But Kennedy was confirmed in ’88.  CRUZ: No, Kennedy was confirmed in ’87...  DICKERSON: He was appointed in ’87.  CRUZ: He was appointed in...  DICKERSON: ... confirmed in ’88. That’s the question, is it appointing or confirming, what’s the difference?  CRUZ: In this case it’s both. But if I could answer the question...  DICKERSON: Sorry, I just want to get the facts straight for the audience. But I apologize.  (BOOING)  (LAUGHTER)  CRUZ: Justice Scalia was a legal giant. He was somebody that I knew for 20 years. He was a brilliant man. He was faithful to the Constitution. He changed the arc of American legal history. And I’ll tell you, his passing tonight, our prayers are with his family, with his wife, Maureen, who he adored, his nine children, his 36 grandkids. But it underscores the stakes of this election. We are one justice away from a Supreme Court that will strike down every restriction on abortion adopted by the states. We are one justice away from a Supreme Court that will reverse the Heller decision, one of Justice Scalia’s seminal decisions, that upheld the Second Amendment right to keep and to bear arms.  We are one justice away from a Supreme Court that would undermine the religious liberty of millions of Americans — and the stakes of this election, for this year, for the Senate, the Senate needs to stand strong and say, “We’re not going to give up the U.S. Supreme Court for a generation by allowing Barack Obama to make one more liberal appointee.”  And then for the state of South Carolina, one of the most important judgments for the men and women of South Carolina to make is who on this stage has the background, the principle, the character, the judgment and the strength of resolve to nominate and confirm principled constitutionalists to the court? That will be what I will do if I’m elected president.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  DICKERSON: All right.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you, Senator Cruz. All right, we’re going to move on to national security here, and we are going to — I want to read a quote from Secretary Robert Gates, former Defense Secretary Robert Gates, who served for eight year — under eight presidents.  And this is what he said about Republican candidates, quote, “Part of the concern that I have with the campaign is that the solutions being offered are so simplistic and so at odds with the way the world really works.”  So, in that spirit, we’re going to work tonight to be more specific.  Mr. Trump, I want to start with you. You have said as president, you’ll get up to speed very quickly. You’ll know more quickly as president than any of the experts.  So, you’ve been elected president. It’s your first day in the Situation Room. What three questions do you ask your national security experts about the world?  TRUMP: What we want to do, when we want to do it, and how hard do we want to hit? Because we are going to have to hit very, very hard to knock out ISIS.  We’re going to also have to learn who our allies are. We have allies, so-called allies, we’re spending billions and billions of dollars supporting people — we have no idea who they are in Syria. Do we want to stay that route, or do we want to go and make something with Russia?  I hate to say Iran, but with Russia, because we — and the Iran deal is one of the worst deals I have ever seen negotiated in my entire life. It’s a disgrace that this country negotiated that deal. But very important...  (APPLAUSE)  Not only a disgrace, it’s a disgrace and an embarrassment. But very important, who are we fighting with? Who are we fighting for? What are we doing? We have to rebuild our country. But we have to — I’m the only one on this stage that said: “Do not go into Iraq. Do not attack Iraq.” Nobody else on this stage said that. And I said it loud and strong. And I was in the private sector. I wasn’t a politician, fortunately.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But I said it, and I said it loud and clear, “You’ll destabilize the Middle East.” That’s exactly what happened.  I also said, by the way, four years ago, three years ago, attack the oil, take the wealth away, attack the oil and keep the oil. They didn’t listen. They just started that a few months ago.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Senator Rubio — just 30 seconds on this question, Senator Rubio. Are those the questions you would ask?  RUBIO: No. I think there are three major threats that you want to immediately get on top of. No. 1 is, what are we doing in the Asia-Pacific region, where both North Korea and China pose threats to the national security of the United States.  No. 2 is, what are we doing in the Middle East with the combination of the Sunni-Shia conflict driven by the Shia arc that Iran is now trying to establish in the Middle East, also the growing threat of ISIS.  And the third is rebuilding and reinvigorating NATO in the European theater, particularly in Central Europe and in Eastern Europe, where Vladimir Putin is now threatening the territory of multiple countries, already controls 20 percent of Georgia and a significant percentage of Ukraine.  DICKERSON: Let me ask you a follow-up, a full, proper question, then.  (APPLAUSE)  Violent extremists are operating or active in 40 countries. Some 80 countries are in different degrees of instability. And so, that’s just the crises overseas. Barack Obama walked into an economic collapse when he came into office. We face international health crises, from Ebola to Zika.  So, there is a lot of opportunity for crisis, as you have talked about. What would you point to in your past to show voters that you’ve been in a crisis and that you’ve been tested when that inevitable crisis comes when you’re president?  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  RUBIO: Well, let me tell you what has happened a couple of years ago. One of the hardest decisions you’ll ever make in Congress is when you are asked by the president to authorize the use of force in a conflict, because you are now putting your name, on behalf of the people of your state, behind a military action, where Americans in uniform could lose their life.  So, in 2014, Barack Obama said he would not take military action against Assad unless it was authorized by the Senate, beginning on the Committee of Foreign Relations, where I am one of its members. And it was hard because you looked at the pictures. I saw the same images people saw. I’m the father of children. I saw the images of these little children — been gassed and poisoned by their own leaders, and we were angry. Something had to happen, and there was the sense that we needed to seek retribution.  And then I looked at Barack Obama’s plan. Barack Obama’s plan, which John Kerry later described as unbelievably small, and I concluded that that attack would not only not help the situation, it would make it actually worse. It would allow Assad to stand up to the United States of America, survive a strike, stay in power and actually strengthen his grip.  So it was a difficult decision to make, and when we only had a few days to look at and make a decision on it, and I voted against Barack Obama’s plan to use force, and it was the right decision.  DICKERSON: Dr. Carson, I want to ask you a question...  (APPLAUSE)  Dr. Carson, you said you’ve had more 2 a.m. — 2 a.m. phone calls than anybody up on this stage. But when those 2 a.m. phone calls came, you operated on a foundation of all of that amazing medical work that you did, all of that learning. So if you were to be president, though, you wouldn’t have the political foundation that hones those instincts when the 2 a.m. phone call comes. So isn’t that a liability?  CARSON: No, it isn’t. First of all, let me go back to your first question for me. It wasn’t phrased as who gets to nominate Supreme Court appointees. Of course that’s the president. So I know that there are some left-wing media who would try to make hay on that.  Secondly, thank you for including me in the debate. Two questions already. This is great. Now, as far...  (LAUGHTER)  (APPLAUSE)  As far as those 2 a.m. phone calls are concerned, judgment is what is required. And the kinds of things that you come up with are sometimes very, very difficult and very unique. One of the things that I was known for is doing things that have not been done before. So no amount of experience really prepares you to do something that has never been done before. That’s where judgment comes in.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And that, I think, is a situation that we’re in right now, a situation that we have never been in before with the kinds of threats that pose real danger to our nation, and it comes in very handy in those situations.  DICKERSON: Governor Kasich, Russia is being credited...  (APPLAUSE)  Russia is being credited with bombing U.S.-backed rebels on behalf of Assad in Aleppo and Syria. They’ve also moved into the Crimea, eastern Ukraine. You’ve said you want to punch them in the nose. What does that mean? What are you going to do?  KASICH: First of all — yes. First of all, look, we have to make it clear to Russia what we expect. We don’t have to declare an enemy, rattle a sword or threaten, but we need to make it clear what we expect. No. 1 is we will arm the folks in Ukraine who are fighting for their freedom. They deserve it. There will be no ifs, ands or buts about it.  Secondly, an attack on NATO, trumped up on any excuse of Russian-speaking people, either in the NATO countries or in Finland or Sweden, is going to be an attack on us. And look, I think we have an opportunity as America to put something really great together again.  The Egyptians, the Saudis, the Jordanians, the Gulf states, they all know they’re at risk. We need to look into Europe, we look at France, we look at Germany and the migrants. We look at Belgium, we look at Britain. Everybody now is being threatened by radical Islam. We have an opportunity to lead.  You know, the fact of the matter is the world is desperate for our leadership. Sometimes they may — they may make a remark here or there that we don’t like, but frankly, the world needs us. And we have an opportunity now to assemble a coalition of the civilized people, those who respect civilization, the rights of women, the rights to protest, to be able to reassert our leadership all across this globe again and make sure this century is going to be the best we’ve ever seen.  DICKERSON: Governor...  (APPLAUSE)  Governor Bush.  BUSH: Yes.  DICKERSON: You said defeating ISIS requires defeating Assad. But wouldn’t that also put us into conflict with Russia, a country that supports Assad? So doesn’t that mean, effectively, Assad’s there to stay?  BUSH: No, it doesn’t, and that’s the problem. The lack of leadership in this country by Barack Obama, John Kerry, Hillary Clinton, thinking that this is a policy that works, this policy of containment with ISIS. It’s a complete, unmitigated disaster. And to allow Russia now to have influence in Syria makes it harder, but we need to destroy ISIS and dispose of Assad to create a stable Syria so that the four million refugees aren’t a breeding ground for Islamic jihadists.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  This is the problem. Donald Trump brought up the fact that he would — he’d want to accommodate Russia. Russia is not taking out ISIS. They’re — they’re attacking our — our — our team, the team that we’ve been training and the team that we’ve been supporting. It is absolutely ludicrous to suggest that Russia could be a positive partner in this. They are on the run. They are making — every time we step back, they’re on the run. The question that you asked was a really good one about what you would do — what three things would you do.  I would restore the military, the sequester needs to be reversed. I would have a strategy to destroy ISIS, and I would immediately create a policy of containment as it relates to Iran’s ambitions, and to make it make clear that we are not going to allow for Iran to do what it’s doing, which is to move towards a nuclear weapon.  Those three things would be the first and foremost things that we need to do...  (BELL RINGING)  BUSH: ... in 2017.  DICKERSON: Mr. Trump, you’re...  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Mr. Trump, you were mentioned here. You did say that you could get along very well with Vladimir Putin. You did at one point say let Russia take care of ISIS...  TRUMP: ... (INAUDIBLE) called me a genius, I like him so far, I have to tell you. Let me just tell you this.  Jeb is so wrong. Jeb is absolutely self — just so you understand, you know what that is? That’s Jeb’s special interest and lobbyist talking.  Look, let me just tell you something, Jeb — Jeb is so wrong. You got to fight ISIS first. You fight ISIS first. Right now you have Russia, you have Iran, you have them with Assad, and you have them with Syria. You have to knock out ISIS. They’re chopping off heads. These are animals. You have to knock ’em out. You have to knock them off strong. You decide what to do after, you can’t fight two wars at one time.  If you listen to him, and you listen to some of the folks that I’ve been listening to, that’s why we’ve been in the Middle East for 15 years, and we haven’t won anything. We’ve spent $5 trillion dollars in the Middle East with thinking like that. We’ve spent $5...  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (BELL RINGING)  TRUMP: Lindsey Graham, who backs him, had zero on his polls. Let me just say something — we’ve spent — we’ve spent.  I only tell the truth, lobbyists.  We’ve spent $5 trillion dollars all over the — we have to rebuild our country. We have to rebuild our infrastructure. You listen to that, you’re going to be there for another 15...  DICKERSON: ... All right...  TRUMP: ... You’ll end up with World War III...  DICKERSON: ... All right, Governor Bush, please respond.  BUSH: The very basic fact is that Vladimir Putin is not going to be an ally of the United States. The whole world knows this. It’s a simple, basic fact.  (APPLAUSE)  BUSH: They’re not taking out — they’re not even attempting to take out ISIS. They’re attacking the troops that we’re supporting. We need to create a coalition, Sunni-led coalition on the ground with our special operators to destroy ISIS and bring about stability. And you can’t do that with Assad in power. He has...  TRUMP: ... We’re supporting troops...  BUSH: ... Let me finish...  TRUMP: ... that we don’t even know who they are.  DICKERSON: ... O.K., settle...  BUSH: ... This is ridiculous...  TRUMP: ... We’re supporting troops that we don’t even know who they are...  DICKERSON: ... All right, Mr. Trump, all right...  TRUMP: We have no idea who they are.  DICKERSON: Gentleman, I think we’re going to leave that there. I’ve got a question for Senator...  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  BUSH: ... This is coming from a guy who gets his foreign policy from the shows.  TRUMP: ... Oh, yeah, yeah...  BUSH: ... This is a guy who thinks that Hillary Clinton is a great negotiator in Iran...  TRUMP: ... Let 44 million in New Hampshire, it was practically (INAUDIBLE)...  BUSH: ... This is a man who insults his way to the nomination...  TRUMP: ... 44 million — give me a break.  (CROSSTALK)  DICKERSON: ... All right, all right, gentlemen, gentlemen, let’s leave it there so I can ask a question of Senator Cruz, who’s also running for president.  (LAUGHTER) (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Senator Cruz, you talked about the first Gulf War as being a kind of model for your focused and determined effort to go after ISIS. But there were 700,000 ground troops as a part of that, and you don’t have a ground component to your plan. Why?  CRUZ: Well, we need to focus on what the objective is, you know? Your question about the first three questions you would ask in this Situation Room. I think it is a problem if the president, commander in chief, we’ve elected does not have the experience and background to understand the threats facing this country coming in on Day 1.  If you look at the threats facing this country, the single gravest threat, national security threat, is the threat of a nuclear Iran. That’s why I’ve pledged on Day 1 to rip to shreds this Iranian nuclear deal, and anyone that thinks you can negotiate Khamenei does not understand the nature of Khamenei.  When it comes to ISIS, we’ve got to have a focused objective. One of the problems of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton’s foreign policy, and, sadly, too many establishment Republicans in Washington, is they focus on issues unrelated to protecting this country. They focus on nation building, they focus on toppling governments to promote democracy, and it ends up undermining our national security.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Now, with regard to ISIS, we need a commander in chief that sets the objective we will utterly defeat them because they have declared war. They’ve declared a jihad on us.  Now, what do we need...  (BELL RINGING)  CRUZ: ... to carry that out. We need overwhelming air power, we need to arm the Kurds, who can be our boots on the ground, and if ground troops are necessary, then we should employ them, but it shouldn’t be politicians demonstrating political toughness. It should be military expert judgment carrying out the objectives set out by the commander in chief.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Very quickly, 30-second follow-up. You’ve said that, essentially, the Kurds would be the American ground forces in there. The criticism that experts have on that is that the Kurds only can work within their territory.  If they take larger amounts of territory, you have an ethnic war with the Arabs. So the Kurds can’t really do as much as you seem to be putting on their backs.  CRUZ: We have Kurds in both Iraq and Syria. They are fighting ISIS right now. They are winning victories right now. ISIS is using American military equipment they’ve seized in Iraq. And the Obama administration refuses to arm the Kurds, the pesh merga, the fighting forces who have been longtime allies.  We ought to be arming them and letting them fight. Now, if we need to embed Special Forces to direct our overwhelming air power, if it is required to use ground troops to defeat ISIS, we should use them, but we ought to start with using our incredible air power advantage.  The first Persian Gulf War, we launched 1,100 air attacks a day. Today, we’re launching between 15 and 30. We’re not using the tools we have, and it’s because the commander in chief is not focused on defeating the enemy.  DICKERSON: All right. Mr. Trump...  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: ... On Monday, George W. Bush will campaign in South Carolina for his brother. As you’ve said tonight, and you’ve often said, the Iraq war and your opposition to it was a sign of your good judgment.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In 2008, in an interview with Wolf Blitzer, talking about President George W. Bush’s conduct of the war, you said you were surprised that Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi didn’t try to impeach him.  You said, quote: “Which, personally, I think would have been a wonderful thing.” When you were asked what you meant by that and you said: “For the war, for the war, he lied, he got us into the war with lies.” Do you still believe President Bush should have been impeached?  TRUMP: First of all, I have to say, as a businessman, I get along with everybody. I have business all over the world.  (BOOING)  TRUMP: I know so many of the people in the audience. And by the way, I’m a self-funder. I don’t have — I have my wife and I have my son. That’s all I have. I don’t have this.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: So let me just tell you, I get along with everybody, which is my obligation to my company, to myself, et cetera.  Obviously, the war in Iraq was a big, fat mistake. All right? Now, you can take it any way you want, and it took — it took Jeb Bush, if you remember at the beginning of his announcement, when he announced for president, it took him five days.  He went back, it was a mistake, it wasn’t a mistake. It took him five days before his people told him what to say, and he ultimately said, “It was a mistake.” The war in Iraq, we spent $2 trillion, thousands of lives, we don’t even have it. Iran has taken over Iraq, with the second-largest oil reserves in the world.  Obviously, it was a mistake.  DICKERSON: So...  TRUMP: George Bush made a mistake. We can make mistakes. But that one was a beauty. We should have never been in Iraq. We have destabilized the Middle East.  DICKERSON: But so I’m going to — so you still think he should be impeached?  BUSH: I think it’s my turn, isn’t it?  TRUMP: You do whatever you want. You call it whatever you want. I want to tell you. They lied. They said there were weapons of mass destruction, there were none. And they knew there were none. There were no weapons of mass destruction.  (BOOING)  DICKERSON: All right. O.K. All right.  Governor Bush — when a member on the stage’s brother gets attacked...  BUSH: I’ve got about five or six...  DICKERSON: ... the brother gets to respond.  BUSH: Do I get to do it five or six times or just once, responding to that?  TRUMP: I’m being nice.  BUSH: So here’s the deal. I’m sick and tired of Barack Obama blaming my brother for all of the problems that he has had.  (APPLAUSE)  BUSH: And, frankly, I could care less about the insults that Donald Trump gives to me. It’s blood sport for him. He enjoys it. And I’m glad he’s happy about it. But I am sick and tired...  TRUMP: He spent $22 million in...  (CROSSTALK)  BUSH: I am sick and tired of him going after my family. My dad is the greatest man alive in my mind.  (APPLAUSE)  BUSH: And while Donald Trump was building a reality TV show, my brother was building a security apparatus to keep us safe. And I’m proud of what he did.  (APPLAUSE)  BUSH: And he has had the gall to go after my brother.  TRUMP: The World Trade Center came down during your brother’s reign, remember that.  (BOOING)  BUSH: He has had the gall to go after my mother.  Hold on. Let me finish. He has had the gall to go after my mother.  TRUMP: That’s not keeping us safe.  BUSH: Look, I won the lottery when I was born 63 years ago, looked up, and I saw my mom. My mom is the strongest woman I know.  TRUMP: She should be running.  BUSH: This is not about my family or his family. This is about the South Carolina families that need someone to be a commander in chief that can lead. I’m that person.  DICKERSON: Governor Kasich, would you weigh in on...  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Governor Kasich, please weigh in.  KASICH: I’ve got to tell you, this is just crazy, huh?  (LAUGHTER)  KASICH: This is just nuts, O.K.? Jeez, oh, man. I’m sorry, John.  DICKERSON: Why is it nuts? Talk about it. Give us your sense of...  KASICH: Oh, well, listen, I think being in Iraq, look, we thought there were weapons of mass destruction. Colin Powell, who is one of the most distinguished generals in modern time, said there were weapons there.  (APPLAUSE)  KASICH: But, but, the fact is we got ourselves in the middle of a civil war. The Sunni, the Shia and the Kurds, never gotten along. In fact, that country was drawn — the borders of that country were drawn after World War I by Westerners that didn’t understand what was happening there. The tragedy of it is that we’re still embroiled. And, frankly, if there weren’t weapons of mass destruction, we should never have gone. I don’t believe the United States should involve itself in civil wars. Civil wars are not in our direct interest, and if you — and look, I served on a defense committee for 18 years and was called into the Pentagon after 9/11 by Secretary Rumsfeld to deal with some of the most serious problems that we faced.  The fact is, is that we should go to war when it is our direct interest. We should not be policemen of the world, but when we go, we mean business. We’ll do our job. We’ll tell our soldiers, our people in the service, take care of your job and then come home once we’ve accomplished our goals.  That’s what we need to do.  DICKERSON: Thirty seconds, Senator Rubio.  RUBIO: I just want to say, at least on behalf of me and my family, I thank God all the time it was George W. Bush in the White House on 9/11 and not Al Gore.  (APPLAUSE)  And you can — I think you can look back in hindsight and say a couple of things, but he kept us safe. And not only did he keep us safe, but no matter what you want to say about weapons of mass destruction, Saddam Hussein was in violation of U.N. resolutions, in open violation, and the world wouldn’t do anything about it, and George W. Bush enforced what the international community refused to do.  And again, he kept us safe, and I am forever grateful to what he did for this country.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: How did he keep us safe when the World Trade Center — the World — excuse me. I lost hundreds of friends. The World Trade Center came down during the reign of George Bush. He kept us safe? That is not safe. That is not safe, Marco. That is not safe.  RUBIO: The World Trade Center came down because Bill Clinton didn’t kill Osama bin Laden when he had the chance to kill him.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: And George Bush — by the way, George Bush had the chance, also, and he didn’t listen to the advice of his C.I.A.  DICKERSON: All right, Dr. Carson, we have a cleansing...  BUSH: Can I just...  DICKERSON: We have a cleansing...  BUSH: I’m not going to invite Donald Trump to the rally in Charleston on Monday afternoon when my brother is coming to speak.  TRUMP: I don’t want to go.  (LAUGHTER)  BUSH: I’m rescinding the invitation. I thought you might want to come, but I guess not.  DICKERSON: All right. Well, Dr. Carson, I have got a question now for you.  A moment of pause here. You have said, Dr. Carson, that — referring to yourself, that people bought into the idea that, quote, “A nice person can’t be tough on terrorists.”  You have called for loosening the rules of engagement for the military, which could lead to more civilian casualties.  So, explain why those casualties would be acceptable in the fight against ISIS?  CARSON: Well, first of all, let me just address the Iraq question.  You know, I was not particularly in favor of us going to war in Iraq, primarily because I have studied, you know, the Middle East, recognizing that those are nations that are ruled by dictators and have been for thousands of years. And when you go in and you remove one of those dictators, unless you have an appropriate plan for replacing them, you’re going to have chaos.  Now, fortunately, we were able to stabilize the situation, and it was the current administration that turned tail and ran and destabilized the situation.  (APPLAUSE)  Now, having said that, in terms of the rules of engagement, I was talking about, you know, Obama has said, you know, we shouldn’t bomb tankers, you know, coming out of refineries because there may be people in there, or because the environment may be hurt.  You know, that’s just asinine thinking. And the fact of the matter is...  (APPLAUSE)  You know, we — obviously, you’re not going to accomplish all of your goals without some collateral damage. You have to be able to assess what is acceptable and what is not.  DICKERSON: All right, thank you, Dr. Carson.  We’re going to have to take a commercial break here. Thank you to all the candidates. We’ll be right back with CBS News’s 2016 debate in Greenville, South Carolina.  (APPLAUSE)  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)  DICKERSON: We’re back with the Republicans who could be president. The topic now is money and how the candidates would spend it. We’ll turn the questioning over to Kimberley Strassel of The Wall Street Journal and Major Garrett of CBS News. Kim?  STRASSEL: Mr. Trump.  TRUMP: Yes.  STRASSEL: You have made a lot of promises and you have also — you’re the only candidate who has said he would not touch entitlements. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget has estimated that your ideas would cost an additional $12 trillion to $15 trillion over the next 10 years and that we would have to have annual economic growth of anywhere from 7.7 percent to 9 percent annually to pay for them. Are you proposing more than you can actually deliver, at least not without big deficits?  TRUMP: First of all, the — when you say I’m the only candidate, if you listen to the Democrats, they want to do many things to Social Security, and I want to do them on its own merit. You listen to them, what they want to do to Social Security, none of these folks are getting elected, O.K., whether they can do it or not. I’m going to save Social Security. I’m going to bring jobs back from China. I’m going to bring jobs back from Mexico and from Japan, where they’re all — every country throughout the world — now Vietnam, that’s the new one.  They are taking our jobs. They are taking our wealth. They are taking our base. And you and I have had this discussion. We’re going to make our economy strong again. I’m lowering taxes. We have $2.5 trillion offshore. We have 2.5 trillion that I think is actually five trillion because the government has no idea when they say 2.5, they have no idea what they’re doing or saying, as they’ve proven very well.  We’re going to bring that money back. You take a look at what happened just this week. China bought the Chicago Stock Exchange, China, a Chinese company. Carrier is moving to Mexico, air conditioning company. Not only the ones I talk about all the time, Nabisco and Ford and — they’re all moving out.  We have an economy that last quarter, G.D.P. didn’t grow. It was flat. We have to make our economy grow again. We’re dying. This country is dying. And our workers are losing their jobs, and you’re going...  STRASSEL: But in terms of...  TRUMP: I’m the only one who is going to save Social Security, believe me.  STRASSEL: O.K. But how would you actually do that? Can I ask you? Because right now, Social Security and Medicare...  TRUMP: Because you have tremendous waste. I’ll tell you...  STRASSEL: They take up two-thirds of the federal budget, and they’re growing.  TRUMP: You have tremendous waste, fraud and abuse. That we’re taking care of. That we’re taking care of. It’s tremendous. We have in Social Security right now thousands and thousands of people that are over 106 years old. Now, you know they don’t exist. They don’t exist. There’s tremendous waste, fraud and abuse, and we’re going to get it. But we’re not going to hurt the people who have been paying into Social Security their whole life and then all of a sudden they’re supposed to get less. We’re bringing our jobs back. We’re going to make our economy great again.  GARRETT: Senator Cruz.  (APPLAUSE)  John mentioned this is about dollars and incentives. We also want to talk about economic growth engagements. You have proposed a consumption tax, you called it the “back tax.” Some analysts compare it more to an attributed “value-added tax.”  From the perspective from economic growth in building wages, how does that work, and how would you address those longstanding conservative concerns that something approaching the “value-added tax” would be used to constantly increase those rates to pay for future government spending and become an escalator of taxation, not of growth?  CRUZ: Well, let me say it at the outset that everyone here understands — everyone understands that how — that the middle class has been left behind in the last seven years of the Obama economy, and we’ve got to bring jobs back. We’ve got to get people back to work. We’ve got to get wages going up again. We’ve got to get people moving from part-time work to full-time work.  We all agree on that, but it’s not going to be solved with magic pixie dust. It’s just going to be solved by declaring into the air, “Let there be jobs.” We actually have to understand the principles that made America great in the first place.  Now, where do you get economic growth? If you look at cause and effect over our nation’s history, every time we lessen the burden of Washington on small-business owners, on job creators, we see incredible economic growth. You do that through tax reform and regulatory reform.  My tax plan — typical family of four, first $36,000 you earn, you pay nothing in taxes — no income taxes, no payroll taxes, no nothing. Above 10 percent, everyone pays the same simple, flat 10 percent income rate. It’s flat and fair. You can fill out your taxes on a postcard, and we abolish the I.R.S. If you want to see the postcard, I’ve got it on my website.  GARRETT: Now, the question — conservatives have sort of this idea conceptually for a long time, but especially on this consumption value-added tax system. In Europe, where it exists, it has become an escalator of taxation to feed government spending, and that’s why conservatives have long resisted it. Why and what would you do as president to make sure that doesn’t happen?  CRUZ: Now, Major, the business flat tax that is in my tax plan is not a VAT. A VAT in Europe is a sales tax. The business flat tax is not a sales tax, it is a tax of 16 percent opposed fairly and evenly across the board on all business.  One of the things that’s critical is we’re doing that in conjunction with abolishing the corporate income tax, with abolishing the Obamacare taxes, with abolishing the payroll taxes, which are the biggest taxes paid by most working Americans, and with abolishing the death tax, which is cruel and unfair. And you asked about economic growth — the nonpartisan Tax Foundation estimated a simple flat tax that would produce 4.9 million new jobs, it would increase capital investment by 44 percent and would lift everyone’s income by double digits.  That’s how you turn the country around, not just hoping and praying for it, but implementing policies that work.  STRASSEL: O.K., I have a question, a related tax question.  Senator Rubio, you have the highest tax rate of anyone up on the stage in terms of the top tax rates, 35 percent. Some economists say, “It would limit its potential to boost economic growth.” You do that so that you will have more revenue to pay for a tripling of the Child Tax Credit.  Normally, it’s liberals who like to use the tax code to insert social policy. Why should conservatives who want to tax adopt the other side’s approach?  RUBIO: Well, because I’m influencing social policy — this is their money. This is the money of parents. You don’t earn the tax credit unless you’re working. That’s your money, it doesn’t belong to government.  Here’s what I don’t understand. If a business takes their money and they invest in the piece of the equipment, they get to write off their taxes. But if a parent takes money that they have earned to work and invests in their children, they don’t? This makes no sense.  Parenting is the most important job any of us will ever have. Family formation is the most important thing in society. So what my tax plan does, is it does create, especially for working families, an additional Child Tax Credit. So that parents who are working get to keep more of their own money, not the government’s money, to invest in their children to go to school, to go to a private school, to buy a new backpack.  Let me tell you, if you’re a parent that’s struggling, then you know that $50 a month is the difference between a new pair of shoes this month or not getting a new pair of shoes for your kids. I’m going to have a tax plan that is pro-family, because the family is the most important institution in society. You cannot have a strong country without strong families.  (APPLAUSE)  STRASSEL: Governor Kasich, this on is on size of government. In 2013, you pushed through a Medicaid reform in your state over the rejections of many of the Republicans in your state. Total enrollment and overall cost of program have gone well beyond what anyone had expected, including yourself. How can you argue that this overall growth fits in with conservative ambition to significantly cut back on the size of federal welfare programs?  KASICH: Yeah. Well, first of all, those numbers, incorrect. We are — our Medicaid programs are coming in below cost estimates, and our Medicaid program in the second year grew at 2.5 percent.  And Kimberley, let me tell you, when we expand Medicaid and we treat the mentally ill, then they don’t live under a bridge or live in a prison, where they cost $22,500 a year.  When we take the drug addicted and we treat them in the prisons, we stop the revolving door of people in and out of prisons, and we save $22,500 a year.  Guess what else? They get their lives back. And the working poor, they’re now getting health care. And you know that about a third of the people who are now getting that health care are people who are suffering very serious illnesses, particularly cancer.  So, what I would tell you is, we’ve gone from an $8 billion hole to a $2 billion surplus. We’ve cut taxes by more than any governor in America by $5 billion. We have grown the number of jobs by 400,000 private-sector jobs since I’ve been governor.  Our credit is strong. Our pensions are strong. And frankly, we leave no one behind. Economic growth is not an end unto itself. We want everyone to rise, and we will make them personally responsible for the help that they get.  And that is exactly the program we’re driving in Ohio. And, boy, people ought to look at Ohio, because it has got a good formula.  (APPLAUSE)  GARRETT: Governor Bush, a question for you — but if you want to jump in, please.  BUSH: I’d like — can I — can I...  GARRETT: Jump in, and then I’ve got a question for you.  BUSH: Look, I admire the fact that Governor Kasich is supporting spending more money on drug treatment and mental health. I think that’s a high priority all across this country, but expanding Obamacare is what we’re talking about, and Obamacare’s expansion, even though the federal government is paying for the great majority of it, is creating further debt on the backs of our children and grandchildren. We should be fighting Obamacare, repealing Obamacare, replacing it with something totally different.  (APPLAUSE)  When I was — as a private citizen, Florida was confronted with the choice. The governor was supportive of doing what John did. So was the Florida Senate. A committed speaker of the House asked me to go as a private citizen to make the case against the expansion.  I did, and it wasn’t expanded there, just as it wasn’t expanded in South Carolina under Governor Haley.  (CROSSTALK)  GARRETT: Real quickly, jump in, because I have got a question for Governor Bush, but jump in.  KASICH: Yeah, let me say a couple of things.  First of all, when Jeb was governor, his first four years as governor, he expand — his Medicaid program grew twice as fast as mine. O.K.? It’s just a fact.  Now, with Obamacare, I’ve not only sued the administration, I did not set up an exchange. And he knows that I’m not for Obamacare, never have been. But here’s what’s interesting about Medicaid.  You know who expanded Medicaid five times to try to help the folks and give them opportunity so that you could rise and get a job? President Ronald Reagan.  Now, the fact of the matter is, we expanded to get people on their feet, and once they’re on their feet, we are giving them the training and the efforts that they need to be able to get work and pull out of that situation.  GARRETT: Understood, Governor Kasich.  KASICH: That’s what we’re doing in our state.  BUSH: South Carolina — South Carolinians need to know this, because the Cato Institute, which grades governors based on their spending, rank him right at the bottom.  GARRETT: Yeah, Governor Bush, fine.  BUSH: And Governor Haley is ranked at the top.  (CROSSTALK)  GARRETT: Let me get in a question from...  BUSH: No. He mentioned my name.  GARRETT: I understand, I understand.  BUSH: Let me finish, though. No, no, no — hey, wait, wait, wait. Just hold, Major, hold, Major. Hold on, Major.  (CROSSTALK)  BUSH: South Carolinians want to make that, they elect the most conservative governor or candidate that can win.  KASICH: Let me — let’s tell you...  GARRETT: I have a question on economic growth, Governor Bush.  (APPLAUSE)  KASICH: Major — Major, we can’t — we’ve got to — look, I have got to correct the record. And the fact of the matter is, we went from an $8 billion hole to a $2 billion surplus. We’re up 400,000 jobs. Our credit is rock solid.  And I don’t know...  GARRETT: A (INAUDIBLE), Governor.  KASICH: Look, the bottom line is the people of this — of this country and this state want to see everybody rise, and they want to see unity, and I don’t want to get into all this fighting tonight, because people are frankly sick of the negative campaigning.  GARRETT: I know, understood. Governor Bush.  KASICH: And I’m going to stay positive about what I want to do from the...  (APPLAUSE)  GARRETT: Governor Bush, from the perspective, economic growth — viewed from this perspective of economic growth, you have proposed a tax on hedge fund managers.  The Americans for Tax Reform, a conservative tax group you’re probably aware of, has said no Republican should be for higher taxes on capital gains. And many conservatives wonder if this proposal of yours would undermine not only that philosophy, but undercut your projection of 4 percent economic growth annually under your presidency?  BUSH: Of course not. It won’t have an impact on hedge funds managers paying ordinary income. In fact, it’s not just hedge fund people, but people that are doing — they’re in the business of investing other people’s money, getting capital gains treatment is not appropriate.  They should be paying ordinary income. That’s their business. They’re grateful to be able to make a lot of money, I’m sure. And what we do is lower the rates. It’s not the end of the world that private equity people and hedge fund folks that are, right now, getting capital gains treatment for the income they earn, pay ordinary income like everybody else in this room. That’s not a problem at all. What we need to do is reform the tax code to simplify the rates, to shift power away from Washington, D.C. That’s what I did as governor of the state of Florida, $19 billion dollars of tax cuts, and it stimulated seven out of the eight years. Florida led the nation in job growth.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Dr. Carson, before we go to break, could you give us your sense of this conversation about either Medicaid or economic growth through taxation?  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  CARSON: Well, first of all, let me just mention on the tax issue. Bencarson.com, go read about it, because my tax plan has been praised by Cato, by Wall Street Journal. Forbes said it is the best, the most pro-growth tax plan, and it’s based on real fairness for everybody. Starts at the 150 percent poverty level, but even the people below that have to pay something, because everybody has to have skin in the game, and the millions of people can’t, you know, talk about what other people have to pay and have no skin in the game.  And it deals with corporate tax rate, and makes it the same as everybody else...  (BELL RINGING)  CARSON: ... Everybody pays exactly the same.  DICKERSON: Doctor...  CARSON: ... And, as far as Medicare and Medicaid, my main goal is to get rid of Obamacare and put the care back in the hands of (INAUDIBLE)...  GARRETT: ... Dr. Carson...  DICKERSON: ... Dr. Carson, I’m sorry, we have to go to a commercial. The free market wants what it wants.  Back soon with the 2016 Republican debate in Greenville, South Carolina.  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)  DICKERSON: Welcome back. We’ll begin the second half of the debate with one of the hottest issues in the Republican campaign, immigration. But before I turn it back to Major Garrett and Kim Strassel, I have one question for Mr. Trump.  Mr. Trump, in the Republican National Committee’s Spanish-language response to the State of the Union, Congressman Diaz-Balart said, quote, “It’s essential that we find a legislative solution,” talking about immigration, “to offer a permanent and humane solution to those who live in the shadows. What does that mean to you, “a humane solution to those who live in the shadows”?  TRUMP: I want everybody taken care of, but we have to take care of our people in this country. We’re not taking care of our people. We have no border. We have no control. People are flooding across. We can’t have it. We either have a border, and I’m very strongly — I’m not proposing. I will build a wall. I will build a wall.  Remember this, the wall will be paid for by Mexico. We are not being treated right.  (APPLAUSE)  We are not being treated properly. If we don’t have borders, if we don’t have strength, we don’t have a country. People are flowing across. We have to take care of our people. Believe me.  GARRETT: Senator Rubio...  (APPLAUSE)  For the purposes of the lines — lines you would draw legislatively as a president on immigration reform, define amnesty.  RUBIO: Well, first of all, I think amnesty is the forgiveness of a wrongdoing without consequence and that — I’ve never supported that. I do not support that. I think there has to be consequences for violating our immigration laws. What I think is clear about this issue to begin with is we’re not going to be able to make progress on illegal immigration until first, illegal immigration is brought under control.  You go back to 1986, when they legalized three million people and they promised to secure the border. It didn’t happen, and as a result, people have lost trust in the federal government. It is now clear that the only way to make progress on immigration is not just to pass a law that enforces the law, but actually prove to people that it’s working.  They want to see the wall built. They want to see the additional border agents. They want to see E-Verify. They want to see an entry-exit tracking system. Forty percent of the people in this country illegally are entering legally and overstaying visas. And only after all of that is in place, then we’ll see what the American people are willing to support on this issue.  I think the American people will be very reasonable, but responsible, about how you handle someone who has been here a long time, who can pass a background check, who pays a fine and starts paying taxes and all they want is a work permit. But you can’t do any of that until you prove to people that illegal immigration is under control once and for all.  (APPLAUSE)  STRASSEL: Senator Cruz. Senator Cruz, you have promised to deport illegal aliens. You have also promised to reverse President Obama’s executive action that gives temporary amnesty to illegals brought here by their parent as children. As president, you would have the names and addresses of the some 800,000 of those that have registered under that action. Now, you have said that in this country, we shouldn’t go door to door, look for illegals, but in this case you would have a list. Would you use it?  CRUZ: Well, you know, your question highlights a sharp difference on immigration on this stage. You know, in a Republican primary, everyone talks tough on immigration. Everyone is against illegal immigration in a Republican primary. But as voters, we’ve been burned over and over again by people that give us a great campaign speech and they don’t walk the walk.  There are sharp differences on amnesty. If you look at the folks on this stage, when Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer and establishment Republicans were leading the fight to pass a massive amnesty plan, I stood with Jeff Sessions and Steve King and the American people and led the fight to defeat that amnesty plan.  (APPLAUSE)  STRASSEL: So would you — would you use the addresses?  CRUZ: Now, that moment...  STRASSEL: Would you pick them up?  CRUZ: That moment was what Reagan would call “a time for choosing.” When it comes to deciding which side of the line you’re on, the Rubio-Schumer amnesty plan...  (BOOING)  CRUZ: ... apparently supported by the donor class, which is why Washington supported it. The Rubio-Schumer amnesty plan passed the Senate, and it was on the verge of passing the House.  House leadership intended to take it up and pass it with the Democrats overruling most of the Republicans. And the question for anyone on illegal immigration is, where were you in that fight? Where did you stand?  You are right. There is a difference between Senator Rubio and me on this question.  (CROSSTALK)  STRASSEL: Senator Rubio, your reply.  RUBIO: We’re going to have to do this again, O.K.? When that issue was being debated, Ted Cruz, at a committee hearing, very passionately said, I want immigration reform to pass, I want people to be able to come out of the shadows. And he proposed an amendment that would legalized people here.  Not only that, he proposed doubling the number of green cards. He proposed a 500 percent increase on guest workers. Now his position is different. Now he is a passionate opponent of all those things.  So he either wasn’t telling the truth then or he isn’t telling the truth now, but to argue he is a purist on immigration is just not true.  (APPLAUSE)  CRUZ: Major, I get a response to that.  GARRETT: Very quickly, Senator Cruz.  STRASSEL: All right. Senator Cruz. Your response, Senator Cruz.  CRUZ: You know, the lines are very, very clear. Marco right now supports citizenship for 12 million people here illegally. I oppose citizenship. Marco stood on the debate stage and said that.  But I would note not only that — Marco has a long record when it comes to amnesty. In the state of Florida, as speaker of the house, he supported in-state tuition for illegal immigrants. In addition to that, Marco went on Univision in Spanish and said he would not rescind President Obama’s illegal executive amnesty on his first day in office.  I have promised to rescind every single illegal executive action, including that one.  (MIX OF APPLAUSE AND BOOING)  CRUZ: And on the question...  (CROSSTALK)  RUBIO: Well, first of all, I don’t know how he knows what I said on Univision, because he doesn’t speak Spanish. And second of all, the other point that I would make...  CRUZ: (SPEAKING SPANISH).  RUBIO: Look, this is a disturbing pattern now, because for a number of weeks now, Ted Cruz has just been telling lies. He lied about Ben Carson in Iowa.  (APPLAUSE)  RUBIO: He lies about Planned Parenthood. He lies about marriage. He’s lying about all sorts of things. And now he makes things up. The bottom line is this is a campaign and people are watching it. And they see the truth behind all these issues.  And here is the truth, Ted Cruz supported legalizing people that were in this country...  CRUZ: That is simply...  (CROSSTALK)  RUBIO: ... and only now does he say...  (CROSSTALK)  CRUZ: That is absolutely false. What he said is knowingly false. And I would note, if you want to assess — if you want to assess...  RUBIO: Well, we’ll put on our website, marcorubio.com. We’re going to...  (CROSSTALK)  CRUZ: ... who is telling the truth...  (CROSSTALK)  CRUZ: If you want to assess who is telling the truth...  (APPLAUSE)  CRUZ: ... then you should look to Jeff Sessions, who said, without Ted Cruz the Rubio-Schumer amnesty bill would have passed, and Ted was responsible. You should look to Rush Limbaugh and Mark Levin, that said...  (CROSSTALK)  GARRETT: Governor Bush, I want to bring this out to a little wider philosophical aspect, if you will.  BUSH: Thank you.  GARRETT: You have said illegal immigrants, quote, “broke the law, but it’s not a felony,” still quoting you, “it’s an act of love, it’s an act of commitment to your family.”  Mr. Trump has, as you are well aware, denounced that statement over and over. Do you still believe it? What does that mean to you? And how does that inform your approach to immigration reform?  BUSH: Great question. I feel like I have to get into my inner Chris Christie, and point out that the reason why I should be president is listening to two senators talk about arcane amendments to bills that didn’t pass.  (APPLAUSE)  BUSH: This is — this is the problem. We need a leader to fix this problem. And I have a detailed plan to do just that, including controlling the border, dealing with the visa over-stayers, making sure that we have a path to legal status, not to citizenship, for those that come out from the shadows and pay a fine, learn English, don’t commit crimes, work and pay taxes.  That is the better approach.  GARRETT: Fundamentally, do you believe this rhetoric is insufficiently compassionate to this issue?  BUSH: The great majority of people that come to this country come because they have no other choice. They want to come to provide for their families. That doesn’t mean it’s right. That doesn’t mean it’s right.  We should pick who comes to our country. We should control our border. Coming here legally should be a lot easier than coming here illegally. But the motivation, they’re not all rapists, as you-know-who said. They’re not that.  These are people that are coming to provide for their families. And we should show a little more respect for the fact that they’re struggling. It doesn’t mean we shouldn’t be controlling the border. That’s exactly what we should be doing.  GARRETT: Mr. Trump...  TRUMP: Look...  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: ... When I announced that I was running for president on June 16th, illegal immigration wasn’t even a subject. If I didn’t bring it up, we wouldn’t even be talking. Now, I don’t often agree with Marco, and I don’t often agree with Ted, but I can in this case. The weakest person on this stage by far on illegal immigration is Jeb Bush. They come out of an act of love, whether you like it or not. He is so weak on illegal immigration it’s laughable, and everybody knows it.  BUSH: ... So, you know...  (BELL RINGING)  BUSH: ... This is the standard operating procedure, to disparage me. That’s fine...  TRUMP: ... Spend a little more money on the commercials...  BUSH: ... But, if you want to talk about weakness, you want to talk about weakness? It’s weak to disparage women.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE). I don’t know what you’re talking about.  BUSH: It’s weak to denigrate the disabled. And,it’s really weak to call John McCain a loser because he was a...  TRUMP: ... I never called him — I don’t call him..  BUSH: ... That is outrageous. The guy’s an American hero.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: He also said about language...  BUSH: ... The simple fact is I’ve also laid out my plans on (INAUDIBLE) immigration...  TRUMP: ... Language. Two days ago he said he would take his pants off and moon everybody, and that’s fine. Nobody reports that. He gets up and says that, and then he tells me, oh, my language was a little bit rough...  STRASSEL: ... O.K....  TRUMP: ... My language. Give me a break...  GARRETT: ... Governor Kasich, here in South Carolina earlier this week, you said the idea, the concept of deporting 11 million undocumented workers...  BUSH: (INAUDIBLE) Just, for the record (INAUDIBLE) make sure my mother’s listening, if she’s watching the debate. I didn’t say that I was going to moon somebody...  TRUMP: ... You did say it, you did say it. Been reported in 10 different news...  GARRETT: ... We will leave the moon metaphors to be adjudicated later, I assure you. Governor Kasich, you said earlier this week in South Carolina, the concept, the idea of deporting 11 million undocumented workers in this country is nuts. Why is it you are so opposed to that idea? Senator Cruz has said it’s a simple application of existing law. The application of that is not inhumane, it is just. Why do you disagree?  KASICH: Before I get to that, this is the ninth or 10th debate. What I’ve been watching here, this back and forth, and these attacks, some of them are personal. I think we’re fixing to lose the election to Hillary Clinton if we don’t stop this.  (APPLAUSE)  KASICH: I mean, the fact is — you know what? I would suggest, why don’t we take off all the negative ads and all the negative comments down from television and let us just talk about what we’re for, and let’s sell that, and the Republican Party will be stronger as a result...  GARRETT: ... What are you for on immigration?  KASICH: ... (OFF MIKE) (INAUDIBLE) First of all, I’m for sealing the border, O.K.? And then I’m for a guest worker program. People can come in, work and go back home. We haven’t closed the border because special interests, I believe, blocked it. Then, we have 11 and a half million people here. If they have not committed a crime since they’ve been here, make them pay a fine and some back taxes, and give them a path to legalization, never to citizenship.  It is not going to happen that we’re going to run around and try to drag 11 and a half million people out of their homes.  I’ll tell you this. Within the first hundred days, I will send a plan like this to the Congress of the United States, and if I’m president, I’ll bet you dollar to doughnuts right now, it will pass.  (BELL RINGING)  That is a reasonable proposal that the people of this country, in my judgment, will support, and so will the bulk of the Congress of the United States.  (APPLAUSE)  STRASSEL: Moving subjects. Dr. Carson, this week Morgan Stanley agreed to pay a $3.2 billion fine to state and federal authorities for contributing to the mortgage crisis. You have a lot of Democrats out saying that we should be jailing more executives, so two questions.  Should financial executives be held legally responsible for financial crisis, and do you think fines like these are an effective way to deter companies from future behavior like that?  CARSON: Well, first of all, please go to my website, bencarson.com, and read my immigration policy, O.K.? Because it actually makes sense.  Now, the — as far as these fines are concerned, you know? Here’s the big problem. We’ve got all these government regulators, and all they’re doing is running around looking for people to fine. And we’ve got 645 different federal agencies and sub-agencies. Way, way too many, and they don’t have anything else to do.  I think what we really need to do is start trimming the regulatory agencies rather than going after the people who are trying to increase the viability, economic viability of our society. Now, that doesn’t mean there aren’t some people out there who are doing bad things. But I’m not sure that the way to solve that problem is by increasing all the regulatory burden. You know, when you consider how much regulations cost us each year, you know? $2 trillion dollars per family, $24,000 per family, that happens to be the same level as the poverty level...  (BELL RINGING)  CARSON: ... for a family of four. If you want to get rid of poverty, get rid of all the regulations.  DICKERSON: Senator Cruz, I have a question for you. Speaker Paul Ryan has made a big commitment to trying to lift the 50 million poor out of poverty. Arthur Brooks, who is the president of the American Enterprise Institute, says, quote, “If we are not warriors for the poor every day, free enterprise has no matter.” How you have been, in your campaign, a warrior for the poor?  CRUZ: I think it is a very important question because the people who have been hurt the most in the Obama economy had been the most vulnerable. It’s been young people. It’s been Hispanics. It’s been African-Americans. It’s been single moms. We have the lowest percentage of Americans working today in any year since 1977.  And the sad reality is big government, massive taxes, massive regulation, doesn’t work. What we need to do instead is bring back booming economic growth, let — small businesses are the heart of the economy. Two-thirds of all new jobs come from small businesses. If we want to lift people out of poverty — you know, I think of these issues from the perspective of my dad.  My dad fled Cuba in 1957. He was just 18. He couldn’t speak English. He had nothing. He had $100 in his underwear. And he washed dishes making 50 cents an hour and paid his way through school. Today, my dad is a pastor. He travels the country preaching the gospel.  Now, I think about all of these issues. How would it impact my dad when he was washing dishes? If we had Obamacare in place right now, the odds are very high my father would have been laid off, because it’s teenaged kids like my dad who have gotten laid off. If he didn’t get laid off, the odds are high he would have had his hours forcibly reduced to 28, 29 hours a week.  We need to lift the burdens on small businesses so you have jobs, and we need welfare reform that gets people off of welfare and back to work.  GARRETT: Mr. Trump — Mr. Trump.  (APPLAUSE)  I was with you in Pendleton, South Carolina, earlier this week at the Rodeo Arena. It was a bit chilly there. You promised the crowd, and they rose to their feet, that if Ford or a company like were to move a factory to Mexico, you would try to stop it or threaten them with a 35 percent tax or tariff on every car sold.  TRUMP: Or a tax.  GARRETT: Right. So my question is, based on your understanding of the presidency, where do you derive that power? Would you need the consent of Congress to go along? And do you see the presidency as a perch from which you can cajole and/or threaten private industry to do something you think is better for the U.S. economy?  TRUMP: I would build consensus with Congress, and Congress would agree with me. I’ll give you an example, because I don’t like the idea of using executive orders like our president. It is a disaster what he’s doing. I would build consensus, but consensus means you have to work hard. You have to cajole. You have to get them into the Oval Office and get them all together, and you have to make deals.  Let me just tell you, I mentioned before, China — big Chinese company bought the Chicago Exchange. Kerry is moving — and if you saw the people, because they have a video of the announcement that Carrier is moving to Mexico, O.K.?  Well, I’ll tell you what. I would go right now to Carrier and I would say I am going to work awfully hard. You’re going to make air conditioners now in Mexico. You’re going to get all of these 1,400 people that are being laid off — they’re laid off. They were crying. They were — it was a very sad situation. You’re going to go to Mexico. You’re going to make air conditioners in Mexico, you’re going to put them across our border with no tax.  I’m going to tell them right now, I am going to get consensus from Congress and we’re going to tax you when those air conditioners come. So stay where you are or build in the United States, because we are killing ourselves with trade pacts that are no good for us and no good for our workers.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: All right. Mr. Trump, thank you so much. We’re going to take a break for a moment. We’ll be back in a moment with the CBS News Republican debate.  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)  DICKERSON: We’re back now from Greenville, South Carolina, with the candidates for the Republican presidential nomination.  Mr. Trump, I have a question for you. Presidents have to, on the one hand, be firm, but also be flexible.  You have been flexible and changed your opinion on a number of things, from abortion to Hillary Clinton. But you have said, rightly, that it’s just like Ronald Reagan, who changed his mind on things.  But at the same time, you’re criticizing Senator Cruz for what you say is a change on immigration. He disputes that, of course.  So, why is your change of opinion make you like Reagan, and when he changes his opinion, it’s a huge character flaw?  (LAUGHTER)  TRUMP: John, in life you have flexibility. You do have flexibility. When you’re fighting wars, you’re going one way, you have a plan. It’s a beautiful plan. It can’t lose. The enemy makes a change, and all of a sudden you have to change.  You have to have flexibility. In Ronald Reagan, though, in terms of what we’re talking about, was the great example. He was a somewhat liberal Democrat who became a somewhat, pretty strong conservative. He became — most importantly, he became a great president. He made many of the changes that I’ve made — I mean, I’ve seen as I grew up, I’ve seen, and as I get older and wiser, and I feel that I am a conservative.  Now, I also feel I’m a common-sense conservative, because some of the views I don’t agree with. And I think a lot of people agree with me, obviously, based on what’s happening.  DICKERSON: Which conservative idea don’t you agree with?  TRUMP: Well, I think these people always hit me with eminent domain, and frankly, I’m not in love with eminent domain. But eminent domain is something you need very strongly.  When Jeb had said, “You used eminent domain privately for a parking lot.” It wasn’t for a parking lot. The state of New Jersey — too bad Chris Christie is not here, he could tell you — the state of New Jersey went to build a very large tower that was going to employ thousands of people.  I mean, it was going to really do a big job in terms of economic development. Now, just so you understand, I got hit very hard. It’s private, it’s private eminent domain. You understand that they took over a stadium in Texas, and they used private eminent domain, but he just found that out after he made the charge.  DICKERSON: All right. Governor Bush, I think by “they,” he is referring to your brother, these on the hook for your brother.  TRUMP: Yeah. Well, Jeb wouldn’t have known about it.  BUSH: So, there — so, there is all sorts of intrigue about where I disagree with my brother, there would be one right there. You should not use eminent domain for private purposes.  A baseball stadium or a parking lot for a limo...  (LAUGHTER)  TRUMP: You shouldn’t have used it then, Jeb.  DICKERSON: But that was his brother.  BUSH: It’s very different. Transmission lines, pipe lines, bridges and highways. All of that is proper use of imminent domain. Not to take an elderly woman’s home to build a parking lot so that high-rollers can come from New York City to build casinos in Atlantic City.  STRASSEL: Senator Cruz, you were mentioned in the mix here, your response?  CRUZ: You know, flexibility is a good thing, but it shouldn’t — you shouldn’t be flexible on core principles. I like Donald, he is an amazing entertainer, but his policies for most of his life...  TRUMP: Thank you very much, I appreciate it.  CRUZ: For most of his life, his policies have been very, very liberal. For most of his life, he has described himself as very pro- choice and as a supporter of partial birth abortion. Right now, today, as a candidate, he supports federal taxpayer funding for Planned Parenthood. I disagree with him on that.  That’s a matter of principle, and I’ll tell you...  TRUMP: You probably are worse than Jeb Bush. You are single biggest liar. This guy’s lied — let me just tell you, this guy lied about Ben Carson when he took votes away from Ben Carson in Iowa, and he just continues. Today, we had robo-calls saying, “Donald Trump is not going to run in South Carolina,” where I’m leading by a lot.  I’m not going to vote for Ted Cruz. This is the same thing he did to Ben Carson. This guy will say anything, nasty guy. Now I know why he doesn’t have one endorsement from any of his colleagues.  CRUZ: Don, I need to go on...  TRUMP: He’s a nasty guy.  CRUZ: I will say, it is fairly remarkable to see Donald defending Ben after he called, “pathological,” and compared him to a child molester. Both of which were offensive and wrong.  But let me say this — you notice Donald didn’t disagree with the substance that he supports taxpayer funding for Planned Parenthood. And Donald has this weird pattern, when you point to his own record, he screams, “Liar, liar, liar.” You want to go...  TRUMP: Where did I support it? Where did I...  CRUZ: You want to go...  (CROSSTALK)  TRUMP: Again, where did I support it?  CRUZ: If you want to watch the video, go to our website at Tedcruz.org.  TRUMP: Hey Ted, where I support it?  CRUZ: You can see it out of Donald’s own mouth.  TRUMP: Where did I support?  CRUZ: You supported it when we were battling over defunding Planned Parenthood. You went on...  TRUMP: That’s a lot of lies.  CRUZ: You said, “Planned Parenthood does wonderful things and we should not defund it.”  TRUMP: It does do wonderful things, but not as it relates to abortion.  CRUZ: So I’ll tell you what...  TRUMP: Excuse me. Excuse me, there are wonderful things having to do with women’s health.  CRUZ: You see, you and I...  TRUMP: But not when it comes to abortion.  CRUZ: Don, the reasoned principle matters. The reasoned principle matters, sadly was illustrated by the first questions today. The next president is going to appoint one, two, three, four Supreme Court justices.  If Donald Trump is president, he will appoint liberals. If Donald Trump is president, your Second Amendment will gone...  (CROSSTALK)  TRUMP: Hold on...  CRUZL You know how I know that?  DICKERSON: Hold on, gentleman, I’m going to turn this car around.  TRUMP: Ted Cruz told your brother that he wanted John Roberts to be on the United States Supreme Court. They both pushed him, he twice approved Obamacare.  DICKERSON: All right, gentlemen.  BUSH: My name was mentioned twice.  DICKERSON: Well, hold on. We’re going to — gentlemen, we’re in danger of driving this into the dirt.  DICKERSON: Senator Rubio, I’d like you to jump in here...  BUSH: He called me a liar.  DICKERSON: I understand, you’re on deck, governor.  BUSH: Also, he talked about one of my heroes, Ronald Reagan.  Ronald Reagan was a liberal maybe in the 1950s. He was a conservative reformed governor for eight years before he became president, and no one should suggest he made an evolution for political purposes. He was a conservative, and he didn’t tear down people like Donald Trump is. He tore down the Berlin Wall.  TRUMP: O.K., governor.  BUSH: He was a great guy.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Senator Cruz, 30 seconds on this one.  CRUZ: I did not nominate John Roberts. I would not have nominated John Roberts.  TRUMP: You pushed him. You pushed him.  CRUZ: I supported...  TRUMP: You worked with him and you pushed him. Why do you lie?  CRUZ: You need to learn to not interrupt people.  TRUMP: Why do you lie?  CRUZ: Donald, adults learn...  TRUMP: You pushed him.  CRUZ: Adults learn not to interrupt people.  TRUMP: Yeah, yeah, I know, you’re an adult.  CRUZ: I did not nominate him. I would not have nominated him. I would’ve nominated my former boss Liberman, who was Justice Scalia’s first law clerk. And you know how I know that Donald’s Supreme Court justices will be liberals? Because his entire life, he support liberals from Jimmy Carter, to Hillary Clinton, to John Kerry.  In 2004, he contributed to John Kerry. Nobody who cares about judges would contribute to John Kerry, Hillary Clinton, Chuck Schumer and Harry Reid.  DICKERSON: We’re going to switch...  CRUZ: That’s what Donald Trump does.  DICKERSON: We’re going to switch here to Senator Marco Rubio.  Senator Marco Rubio, please weigh in.  RUBIO: On anything I want?  DICKERSON: I thought you had a point?  RUBIO: Well, let me talk about poverty.  DICKERSON: I thought you had a point you wanted to make.  RUBIO: I do.  BUSH: That was me.  RUBIO: I had something important.  DICKERSON: You’re on deck, sir.  RUBIO: The issue of poverty is critical, because for me, poverty is the — is — is free enterprise not reaching people. Today, we have antipoverty programs that don’t cure poverty. We don’t cure poverty in America. Our antipoverty programs have become, in some instances, a way of life, a lifestyle.  Now, we do need antipoverty programs, you can’t have free enterprise programs without them, but not as a way of life. And so I have a very specific proposal on this and I don’t — in 60 seconds, I can’t describe it all, but it basically turns the program over to states. It allows states to design innovative programs that cure poverty, because I think Nikki Haley will do a better job curing poverty than Barack Obama.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Senator, I wanted to ask you, just going back to immigration, in the last debate, you listed your series of accomplishments in the Senate. One thing you left off was — was immigration reform. Is it the case that in your list of accomplishments you can’t mention that?  RUBIO: Well, no. It’s not the case. It didn’t pass, and we haven’t solved immigration in this country. It’s still a problem. It is worse today than it was three years ago, which is worse than it was five years ago. And it has to be confronted and solved.  But the only way forward on this issue — you asked a question about flexibility. Let me tell you about that. One of the things that you need in leadership is the ability to understand that to get things done, you must figure out the way to get it done. You will not pass comprehensive immigration reform. People do not trust the federal government.  They want to see the law being enforced. They want to see illegal immigration come under control. They want to see that wall. They want to see E-Verify. They want to see all of these things working, and then they will have a conversation with you about what do you do with people that have been here a long time that are otherwise, you know, not criminals. But they’re not going to do it until you first enforce the law.  DICKERSON: Dr. Carson, I have...  (APPLAUSE)  Dr. Carson, I have a question for you. Candidates are...  CARSON: Before you ask the question, can I respond to the — you know, they mentioned my name a couple of times.  DICKERSON: All right. You have 30 seconds, Doctor.  CARSON: All right. Well, first of all, you know, so many people have said to me, “You need to scream and jump and down — jump up and down like everybody else.” Is that really what you want? What we just saw? I don’t think so.  And you know, I — when I got into this race, I decided to look under the hood of the engine of what runs Washington, D.C., and my first inclination was to run away, but I didn’t do it because I’m thinking about our children and the fact that we are the United States of America. And anybody up here is going to be much better than what’s going to come on the other side. And what happened tonight with — with Justice Scalia tells you that we cannot afford to lose this election, and we cannot be tearing each other down.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Dr. Carson, I — let me ask you a different question. When you were — you were the first one, really, to talk about political correctness. Everybody now talks about it, but that was really what sparked your — your rise. Politicians are often accused of glossing over any hard choices people have to make, just always selling happy, nice things. So in the — in the spirit of saying something that might be politically incorrect, tell the voters something that they need to hear but that might be politically incorrect?  CARSON: Well, first of all, I’m not a politician, so I’m never going to become a politician. But here’s what — here’s what people need to know. People need to know that free college is not — it’s a non-starter. You know, you have to look at our economic situation. We’re on the verge of economic collapse and, you know, we’re — it’s not just the $19 trillion, but it’s also the $200 trillion in unfunded liabilities.  What we need to think about is, what does that do to the average person? When we have a debt of that nature, it causes the Fed to change their policy, it causes the central bank to keep the — the rates low, and who does does that affect? Mr. Average, who used to go to the bank every Friday and put part of his check in the bank and watch it grow over three decades and be able to retire with a nice nest egg, that’s gone. That part of the American dream is gone.  All of these things are disappearing, and Bernie Sanders and people like Hillary Clinton blame it on the rich. They say those evil rich people, if we take their money we can solve the problem. It’s not the evil rich people. It’s the irresponsible, evil government.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Governor Kasich. Governor Kasich, you’ve been described as the Democrats’ favorite Republican. You talked about in New Hampshire, Democrats would come up to you and say, “I hope you win.” Why will that help you win a Republican nomination?  KASICH: You know, John, I think all people are the same. Look, I did 106 town halls, and I’ve been doing them left and right here in South Carolina. The first thing we have to do is grow the economy, and I know the formula because I was chairman in Washington when we balanced the budget and created so many jobs, and the same that we’ve been able to do in Ohio. You need common-sense regulations so small business can flourish, you need lower taxes both on business and individuals, and you need a fiscal plan to be able to get ourselves in a situation where people can predict a little bit about the future when it comes to the fiscal issues.  And when you have that formula, combined with work force that’s trained, you can explode the economy and create many jobs. I have done it twice, and I want to go back to Washington and do it again.  John, the thing is, is I think that there are people now, these blue-collar Democrats — my dad was a blue-collar Democrat — the Democratic Party has left them. When they’re arguing about being socialists, they’ve left — they have lost those blue-collar Democrats.  And you know what I think they get out of me — is my sense of what they get out of me, and it’s embarrassment about campaigns, you brag about yourself.  But I think I’m a uniter, I think people sense it. I think they know I have the experience, and that I’m a man that can give people hope and a sense that they have the opportunity rise. And I’ll tell you, I love these blue-collar Democrats, because they’re going to vote for us come next fall, promise you that.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Mr. Trump, let me ask you a question. Presidents in both parties say that the one thing you need in your administration is somebody who can tell you you’re wrong.  You don’t necessarily seem like somebody who has somebody who tells you you’re wrong a lot. Can you tell us of an instance where somebody has said, “Donald Trump, you’re wrong,” and you listened to them?  TRUMP: Well, I would say my wife tells me I’m wrong all the time. And I listen.  (LAUGHTER)  DICKERSON: About what?  TRUMP: Oh, let me just say — look, I am very open — I hired top people. I’ve had great success. I built a great, great company. I don’t need to do this. I’m self-funding. I’m spending a lot of money. I’ve spent — like in New Hampshire, I spent $3 million. Jeb bush spent $44 million. He came in five, and I came in No. 1.  That’s what the country needs, folks. I spent 3, he spends 42 of their money, of special interest money. And it’s just — this is not going to make — excuse me. This is not going to make our country great again.  This is not what we need in our country. We need people that know what the hell they’re doing. And politicians, they’re all talk, they’re no action. And that’s why people are supporting me.  I do listen to people. I hire experts. I hire top, top people. And I do listen. And you know what? Sometimes they’re wrong. You have to know what to do, when to do it. But sometimes they’re wrong.  DICKERSON: Let me — something, in talking to voters that they wish somebody would tell you to cut it out is the profanity. What’s your reaction to that?  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: Well, I’ll tell you — over the years, I’ve made many speeches. People have asked me, big companies have asked me to make speeches, and friends of mine that run big companies on success.  And occasion, in order to sort of really highlight something, I’ll use a profanity. One of the profanities that I got credited with using, that I didn’t use, was a very bad word, two weeks ago, that I never used.  I said, “You.” And everybody said “Oh, he didn’t say anything wrong.” But you bleeped it, so everyone thinks I said the — I didn’t say anything. I never said the word.  It is very unfair, that criticism. Now, I will say this, with all of that being said, I have said I will not do it at all, because if I say a word that’s a little bit off color, a little bit, it ends up being a headline.  I will not do it again. I was a very good student at a great school not using — by the way — not using profanity is very easy.  DICKERSON: All right. O.K. Governor Bush, I’d like to ask you...  BUSH: Yeah, well, I have got to respond to this.  DICKERSON: Well, can I — how about you respond, and then you can answer the question I’m about to ask you.  BUSH: Sounds like a good plan.  DICKERSON: It’ll be...  BUSH: Or you could ask me two questions, so I could get two minutes instead of one.  DICKERSON: If we adjudicate this, the night will be over.  Governor, in 2012, you said that your father and Ronald Reagan would have a hard time in today’s Republican Party, based on their records of trying to find accommodation and finding some degree of common ground.  Do you still feel that way?  BUSH: I think the dysfunction in Washington is really dangerous, that’s what I think. And we need a proven leader that has a record of solving problems, someone who doesn’t cut and run; someone who could be a commander in chief to unite our country around common purposes; someone who doesn’t disparage people.  Someone that doesn’t brag, for example, that he has been bankrupt four times and it was great, because he could use the legal system.  Someone...  TRUMP: That’s not — let me respond. That’s another lie. I never went bankrupt!  (CROSSTALK)  DICKERSON: Hold on, Mr. Trump.  (CROSSTALK)  TRUMP: No, but it’s another lie.  DICKERSON: Hold on, Mr. Trump.  TRUMP: No, but it’s another lie. This guy doesn’t know what he’s talking about. Just a lie.  BUSH: We need someone with a proven record to be able to forge consensus to solve problems.  And right now, both Republicans and Democrats in Washington don’t get it. People are struggling — 63 percent of Americans can’t make a $500 car payment. Most Americans are living paycheck to paycheck. And we need someone has a proven record of growing the economy, reforming the things that are broken.  And I’m that person.  DICKERSON: O.K., Mr. Trump, your response.  (APPLAUSE)  TRUMP: Let me just tell you. Jeb goes around saying, just like the biggest business leaders in this country, I’ve used the laws of the land to chapter — I bought a company, I threw it immediately into a chapter, I made a great deal. I uses the laws to my benefit, because I run a company.  BUSH: Yeah...  TRUMP: Excuse me, Jeb!  BUSH: Yeah.  TRUMP: I never went bankrupt, never.  Now — but you don’t want to say that. Now, let me just say, I’ve used it, just like the biggest leaders in the country. Let me tell you something — Florida. Florida, he put so much debt on Florida. You know, we keep saying he’s a wonderful governor, wonderful governor. He put so much debt on Florida, and he increased spending so much that as soon as he got out of office, Florida crashed.  I happened to be there. It’s my second home. Florida crashed. He didn’t do a good job as governor.  BUSH: Here we go.  TRUMP: And you haven’t — excuse me, you haven’t heard that. You listen to the good record in Florida. You take a look at what happened, as soon as that year ended he got out, Florida crashed. Too much debt.  He loaded it up with debt, and his spending went through the roof.  (CROSSTALK)  TRUMP: By the way...  DICKERSON: The bells are ringing, sir.  TRUMP: ... he was not a good governor.  BUSH: Here’s the record. Here’s the record. We led the nation in job growth seven out of eight years. When I left there was $9 billion of reserves, 35 percent of general revenue. No state came close to that.  TRUMP: Take a look at your numbers.  BUSH: When I — during my time, we were one of the two states to go to AAA bond rating. We didn’t go bankrupt like Trump did and call it success when people are laid off, when vendors don’t get paid. That’s not success.  What we did was create an environment where people had a chance to have income. Personal income during my time went up by 4.4 percent.  TRUMP: Florida went down the tubes right after he got out of office.  BUSH: The government grew by...  TRUMP: Went right down because of what he did to it.  BUSH: ... half of that.  DICKERSON: All right. Thank you.  Senator Rubio, I want to ask you a 30-second question, no president can...  RUBIO: Thirty seconds.  DICKERSON: No — well, I’ll ask the question, you do what you want.  RUBIO: I speak fast.  (LAUGHTER)  DICKERSON: No president can know everything, right? So a smart leader knows how to ask questions. So if you could talk to any previous president, what’s the smart question you would ask about that job that you would want to know?  RUBIO: Well, I think one of the presidents — well, the president I grew up under was Ronald Reagan. And Reagan had a vision for America’s future. And if you think about what Ronald Reagan inherited, it’s not unlike what the next president is going to inherit.  This is the worst president we’ve had in 35 years, 35 years back would have made it Jimmy Carter. That’s what Ronald Reagan inherited. And I think the question you would ask is, how did you inspire again the American people to believe in the future?  How did you — what did it take to ensure that the American people, despite all of the difficulties of the time — you know, you look back at that time, the American military was in decline. Our standing in the world was in decline. We had hostages being held in Iran. Our economy was in bad shape.  The American people were scared about the future. They were scared about what kind of country their children were going to live in and inherit. And yet somehow Ronald Reagan was able to instill in our nation and in our people a sense of optimism.  And he turned America around because of that vision and ultimately because of that leadership. I wish Ronald Reagan was still around. This country needs someone just like that.  And if our next president is even half the president Ronald Reagan was, America is going to be greater than it has ever been.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: All right. That’s going to have to be it there, Senator Rubio. We have got to go to a break. We will be right back with the CBS News Republican debate in Greenville, South Carolina.  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)  DICKERSON: Time now for closing statements. You will each have one minute, and we’ll begin with Governor Kasich.  KASICH: Well, I want to thank the people of South Carolina. You’ve been fantastic. And look, what I want you to know is I’m going to send a lot of power, money and influence back to where we all live. But as I’ve traveled around South Carolina, I’ve noticed something. You know, it’s that people have a sense that you’re not going to wait on a president. You know, when I was a kid, we didn’t wait on presidents to come to that little blue-collar town and fix things.  You know, the Lord made all of us special. The Lord wants us to be connected. I believe we’re part of a very big mosaic. And I’ll send the power back. And whoever gets elected president here, hopefully will take care of the issue of jobs and wages and Social Security and the border.  But the spirit of the America rests in all of us. It’s in our guts. It’s taking care of our children. It’s taking care of the lady next door who just lost her husband. It’s fixing the schools where we live and telling kids to stay off drugs. You see, I think what the Lord wants is for to us engage, and in America, the spirit of America doesn’t come from the top down. The spirit of America rests in us. And I want to call on everyone in America to double down and realize that you were made special to heal this country and lift it for everyone.  Thank you all very much. And I hope I can have your vote in South Carolina.  (APPLAUSE)  DICKERSON: Dr. Carson — Dr. Carson, you’re next.  CARSON: This is the first genera
“I think there’s always been a case to be made that Donald Trump looked at this as a way to extend his brand to a new generation of people,” said Rick Wilson, a Florida-based Republican strategist who has done work for a group supporting Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. “I bet ‘Art of the Deal’ was in the remainder bin until this year.”  Mr. Trump’s advisers resist the idea that he is in the campaign to make money. They note that Mr. Trump’s political stands have cost him money, too, as when Macy’s, which has sold Trump-branded men’s wear, and NBC, which airs the reality show “The Celebrity Apprentice” that Mr. Trump hosted, cut ties with Mr. Trump over his comments about illegal immigration.  “It’s not just the business Mr. Trump has lost but the business opportunities that are not coming to him because of the strong stands he has taken,” said Corey Lewandowski, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager. “I’ve personally been there in the room when he has been offered massive, massive business opportunities out of the country, and he says he does not want to do them because his sole focus is running for the president of the United States.”  But Mr. Trump has been dubious in the past of wealthy businessmen, like Steve Forbes and Michael R. Bloomberg, who actually spend their own money on campaigns for high office. During the 2000 election, according to Fortune magazine, when Mr. Trump flirted with an independent bid for president, he scheduled paid speeches in the same cities where he was holding political events. “It’s very possible that I could be the first presidential candidate to run and make money on it,” Mr. Trump said at the time.  Some of the costs for which Mr. Trump’s companies are now charging his campaign would probably be incurred even if he were not running for president, such as salaries for borrowed Trump Organization personnel and some of his private plane flights. Excluding short hops around the New York City area, Mr. Trump’s private aircraft logged 66 flights in July, August and September 2015, according to the most recent available federal flight records. During the same period in 2014, the aircraft made 51 flights.  Mr. Trump would hardly be the first person to find a financial upside to running for president. Mike Huckabee, who dropped out of the Republican race on Monday, has used his campaign mailing lists to hawk miracle cures for cancer. A variety of failed Republican contenders have parlayed White House bids into lucrative careers on radio and television. And Hillary Clinton’s six-figure speaking fees are due, in some measure, to her high profile as a former candidate and cabinet secretary.  But a tour through campaign filings suggests that no one meshes business and political pursuits quite as seamlessly as the candidate whose campaign is built on his celebrity.  Photo  Mr. Trump spent $114,000 to stage an enormous rally in September in Dallas, even though Texas does not hold its primary until March. He spent about $2 million on hats, T-shirts and other merchandise, roughly half of it going to a Louisiana-based company, Ace Specialties, owned by a board member of Mr. Trump’s son’s charitable foundation. During the last half of 2015, Mr. Trump’s campaign spent more on renting stages and audiovisual equipment ($1.4 million) than on voter lists, field offices and collecting signatures to get onto ballots ($1.2 million.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It remains to be seen whether Mr. Trump’s campaign operation is better at promoting the candidate’s brand or at winning elections. He lost the Iowa caucuses by a few percentage points. On the other hand, Mr. Trump has sold 179,000 copies of his new book, “Crippled America,” according to Nielsen BookScan, about $4 million worth of sales at the list price.  Mr. Trump himself can seem hazy on the distinction between his political and business pursuits. Virtually every Trump speech includes a reference to one of his hotels or casinos; recently he heaped praise on the Doral, the luxury golf resort outside Miami he acquired in 2012. He often suggests that the Obama administration should have read his book “The Art of the Deal” before negotiating the Iran nuclear agreement. (As Mr. Wilson suspected, sales of that 1987 best seller have lately skyrocketed, from 3,000 copies in 2014 to 47,000 in 2015.)  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  At a campaign event in Exeter on Wednesday night, Mr. Trump promoted his soon-to-open Washington hotel, which will be in the renovated old post office building on Pennsylvania Avenue.  “It’s going to be a fantastic project,” Mr. Trump promised. “We’re going to try and have it open for a certain date,” he told the crowd, adding, “sitting on Pennsylvania Avenue.”  Mr. Lewandowski, the campaign manager, said there was no confusion back at the campaign headquarters (a slice of the fifth floor of Trump Tower). Since the campaign is not allowed to take in-kind contributions from the company, Mr. Lewandowski said, every borrowed Trump employee and flight-hour has to be properly compensated out of the campaign account.  “We pay fair market value for all the items that we use,” Mr. Lewandowski said. “We pay the Trump Corporation or the Trump entities such things as the rent for the headquarters.”  Some critics remain unconvinced that all of the help Mr. Trump’s companies are providing his campaign is being properly accounted for.  In December, Mr. Trump threatened legal action against a pro-Jeb Bush “super PAC,” Right to Rise, after the group ran ads suggesting Mr. Trump was not fit to be commander in chief. But the threat was delivered by Alan Garten, general counsel to the Trump Organization, rather than by Mr. Trump’s campaign.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Reminded that candidates are forbidden to use corporate resources for campaign purposes, Mr. Trump’s company argued that an attack on Mr. Trump anywhere was an attack on him everywhere. “The Trump Organization has vigorously policed Mr. Trump’s brand and business interests for many years,” the company said in a statement. “Those rights are not forfeited by virtue of Mr. Trump’s candidacy.”  Right to Rise has filed an F.E.C. complaint, charging that Mr. Trump is illegally using corporate resources to further his campaign.  There are signs that Mr. Trump has begun to invest more significantly in a traditional political apparatus. His campaign’s payments to companies not affiliated with the Trump Organization doubled between August and November. As of the end of December, Mr. Trump had spent almost as much on field staff ($2 million) as on promotional merchandise and marketing ($2.5 million).  And at the moment, Mr. Trump leads by double-digits in national polls and in New Hampshire, which holds its primary on Tuesday.  One way or another, he suggested Wednesday, he will win.  “If I don’t make the White House on Pennsylvania Avenue,” Mr. Trump told his supporters, “I’m going to be living on Pennsylvania Avenue anyway.”
Photo  Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton sharply criticized Senator Barack Obama for the first time yesterday as inexperienced on national security, calling him “irresponsible and frankly naïve” for saying he would be willing to meet without preconditions with leaders of Iran, North Korea and three other nations during his first year as president.  Mr. Obama responded swiftly, saying the Clinton campaign was concocting a “fabricated controversy.” He also contended that Mrs. Clinton’s skeptical view of such meetings was similar to that of President Bush.  Mrs. Clinton’s remark was a rare instance of her personally intensifying the months-old effort by her campaign to portray her, a two-term senator and former first lady, as the most prepared Democrat to become commander in chief in 2009, and Mr. Obama, a senator since 2005, as not ready for the job. Mr. Obama, meanwhile, has for months questioned Mrs. Clinton’s judgment on national security, particularly her vote in 2002 to authorize the war in Iraq.  The candidates’ back-and-forth was the continuation of a disagreement that began Monday night as a flash point in the YouTube debate of the eight Democratic presidential candidates.  Mrs. Clinton’s criticism of Mr. Obama yesterday came in response to a reporter’s question about an Obama campaign memorandum that was released earlier in the day. The memorandum, from Mr. Obama’s communications staff, accused her of flip-flopping on whether she would talk directly with leaders of those countries as well as of Cuba, Syria and Venezuela.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton has never publicly promised to talk directly to those leaders. But on the campaign trail this spring she has repeatedly criticized the Bush administration for not dealing directly with Iranian leaders, and she has chided President Bush for saying “he will not talk with bad people.”  The candidates were asked at the debate if they would be willing to meet unconditionally with those five leaders, people the Bush administration regards as hostile at best. Mr. Obama said he would, citing a history of American diplomacy with enemies.  “It is a disgrace that we have not spoken to them,” he said.  He also recalled President Ronald Reagan as excoriating Soviet leaders publicly while negotiating with them privately, an example that Mrs. Clinton has also used, almost word-for-word, in criticizing current White House diplomatic strategy.  Mrs. Clinton replied next, and chose not to reach for the Soviet example. Instead she gave a toughly worded answer about the complexities of diplomacy, an answer that was not inconsistent with her past remarks, yet that conveyed sharpened skepticism about the leaders of nations like Iran and North Korea.  While pledging a “very vigorous diplomatic effort” including presidential envoys “to test the waters,” she said she would not “promise a meeting at that high a level before you know what the intentions are.”  “I don’t want to be used for propaganda purposes,” Mrs. Clinton said.  “We’re not going to just have our president meet with Fidel Castro and Hugo Chávez and, you know, the president of North Korea, Iran and Syria until we know better what the way forward would be,” she added to applause.  Within hours, Clinton advisers were arguing that Mr. Obama’s response was too soft, while Obama advisers were making two points: That their candidate was not promising meetings but said only that he was willing to consider them, and that Mrs. Clinton’s response mirrored the president’s pattern of not meeting with leaders of “rogue nations,” as he calls them.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  By yesterday morning, both the Obama and Clinton campaigns had prepared memorandums to showcase these talking points.  The Obama campaign released its memorandum first, arguing that Mr. Obama would pursue “tough diplomacy” but also use carrots like leader-to-leader talks; Mrs. Clinton, the document asserted, disagreed with using “every tool at the president’s disposal to address problems before they become threats.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A half-hour later, a reporter from The Quad-City Times, in Iowa, asked Mrs. Clinton about the Obama campaign memorandum. According to the newspaper, Mrs. Clinton said that she had not reversed herself on leader-to-leader talks — and that she would not rule them out. But she also asserted, according the paper, that Mr. Obama was regretting his answer at Monday’s debate, an answer, she said, “that was irresponsible and frankly naïve.”  Obama advisers said yesterday that they had struck a nerve, prompting Mrs. Clinton to attack. While the Obama memorandum came first, it is another thing for the candidate, in this case, Mrs. Clinton, to go on the offensive herself.  The Clinton campaign, meanwhile, arranged for reporters to interview Madeleine K. Albright, a secretary of state under President Bill Clinton. Ms. Albright, who supports Mrs. Clinton, said her answer in the debate was “very sophisticated” and showed her “understanding of how the diplomatic tool needs to be used.”  While Ms. Albright declined to comment on Mr. Obama’s response, the Clinton campaign released its own memorandum doing so yesterday afternoon.  “Senator Obama has committed to presidential-level meetings with some of the world’s worst dictators without precondition during his first year in office,” it argued. “Senator Clinton is committed to vigorous diplomacy but understands that it is a mistake to commit the power and prestige of America’s presidency years ahead of time by making such a blanket commitment.”  Mr. Obama chose to respond by doing his own interview with The Quad-City Times. “I didn’t say these guys were going to come over for a cup of coffee some afternoon,” the newspaper quoted him as saying.  “From what I heard, the point was, well, I wouldn’t do that because it might allow leaders like Hugo Chávez to score propaganda points,” he said, referring to the Venezuelan president. “I think that is absolutely wrong.”  According to the newspaper, Mr. Obama also said that, in terms of national security, an example of “irresponsible and naïve” action was voting to authorize the Iraq war, as Mrs. Clinton had.  Both campaigns declined requests to interview the candidates yesterday.
The business leaders’ goal contrasts with the campaign messages of both parties. While the executives seem to answer Mr. Obama’s call for “economic patriotism” by their tentative embrace of higher personal taxes, in interviews many of them have rejected his “pay your fair share” talk as class warfare, and a good number oppose his re-election.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the business leaders’ position also contradicts the stand of Mitt Romney and other Republicans, who say that all tax increases are “job killers,” that the federal budget can be balanced with spending cuts alone and that any overhaul of the tax code should be “revenue neutral,” neither raising nor lowering the government’s total tax collection.  “To say that you can solve this without increases in taxes is ludicrous,” said David M. Cote, the chief executive of Honeywell, a Republican and a member of Mr. Obama’s Bowles-Simpson fiscal commission in 2010. “Most wealthy people get it. They just don’t want to be put in the position, though, where you pay more in the taxes and the profligate spending continues.”  The Wall Street event on Thursday was just the latest, if the highest profile, of near daily developments in recent weeks in which prominent figures have stepped out of corporate suites to back a deal that would generate more revenue and, by implication, raise taxes on themselves. They support those moves if they are part of a bipartisan compromise that also reduces the long-term costs of entitlement programs, chiefly Medicare and Medicaid, that are the biggest factors driving projections of unsustainable federal debt.  Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, who is a Democrat, said, “The people, including myself, who are willing to give more revenue don’t want to take on the moral hazard” of sending more money to Washington unless the White House and Congress “deal with the pressing need to cut the budget.”  Photo  On Monday, Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase hosted a Wall Street lunch for about 75 other chief executives to hear from budget experts, including Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, a Democrat, and Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, a Republican, about what the business leaders could do to promote a bipartisan deal. How, for example, could they persuade Republicans to drop their antitax position?  Business leaders “think it’s just really important that we fix this,” said Mr. Dimon, an early backer of Mr. Obama whose relationship with him later frayed. “They’re not into whether the tax rate for higher-paid individuals is 35 percent or 39.6 percent.” He was referring first to the top Bush-era tax rate, which high-income taxpayers now pay, and then to the Clinton-era rate, which they face after Dec. 31 if the Bush tax cuts expire as scheduled. Mr. Obama supports ending the cuts for high incomes, and Republicans oppose it.  On Tuesday, attendees at the national conference of the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association met in New York with Mr. Warner and Senator Saxby Chambliss, Republican of Georgia. The two belong to the Senate’s bipartisan “Gang of Eight,” which has struggled for nearly two years to draft a spending and taxes deal.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “I’m talking to everybody in this room,” Mr. Chambliss told his audience. “If you like the package that we ultimately come up with, then we haven’t done our job — because everybody is going to have to ultimately pay a price in this.”  Like others who have privately lobbied lawmakers, Mr. Blankfein and Mr. Cote reject suggestions that the philosophical chasm between the parties is unbridgeable.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “There are very conservative Republicans in the House who sit there and say, ‘I would agree to a revenue increase if there was significant entitlement reform,’ ” Mr. Cote said. “And then you’ll run into Democrats who say there won’t be any entitlement reform unless there’s revenue increases. For most of us in the business community, we say: ‘It sounds to us like you’ve got a deal. You just need to sit down and flesh out the details.’ ”  That, as members of the Simpson-Bowles commission can attest, is easier said than done.  The panel’s dissenters, who opposed the majority’s recommendations of a $4 trillion, 10-year package to reduce annual deficits with a combination of spending cuts and new revenue, included all three House Republicans. Among them was Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the House Budget Committee chairman, who is now Mr. Romney’s vice-presidential running mate.  The Fix the Debt campaign’s inspiration is the dormant Simpson-Bowles framework, and the group’s formation is due in large measure to nonstop proselytizing of business leaders by the commission’s chairmen, Erskine B. Bowles, a businessman who was a White House chief of staff to President Bill Clinton, and Alan K. Simpson, a former Senate Republican leader from Wyoming.  According to the group’s president, Maya MacGuineas, the money raised is financing a growing staff of about 35 at a Washington “war room,” chapters in up to 35 states and ultimately, perhaps, television ads and other help for politicians — members of Congress or even the president — who would need support in taking unpopular positions on tax increases or spending cuts.  Mr. Dimon, speaking for JPMorgan Chase, said: “You know, we’re in 1,900 hamlets in America. I’d — we’d — be calling them all up, literally we’d start flying people in. It would be a whole different ballgame, I think, if we had something to support, and with the president supporting it.”
While it bars such suits, the measure contains an exception allowing certain cases involving defective weapons or criminal behavior by a gun maker or dealer, such as knowingly selling a weapon to someone who has failed a criminal background check.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  President Bush said in a statement that he looked forward to signing the bill, which he said would "further our efforts to stem frivolous lawsuits, which cause a logjam in America's courts, harm America's small businesses, and benefit a handful of lawyers at the expense of victims and consumers."  Backers of the measure say it is necessary to keep the American arms industry in business, while opponents say the law would deprive gun violence victims of a legitimate right to sue. Dispirited gun-safety advocates said they now expected attempts to dismiss nearly a dozen lawsuits around the country, and they vowed to challenge the constitutionality of the bill in court.  "It's always been a tough fight, let's face that," said Representative Carolyn McCarthy, Democrat of New York, who ran for Congress in 1996 after her husband was killed and her son injured by a gunman on the Long Island Rail Road. She added, "This is personal for me."  Fifty-nine Democrats joined 223 Republicans and the House's lone independent to pass the bill. The chief House sponsor of the bill, Representative Cliff Stearns, Republican of Florida, said the measure received a boost in July, when Pentagon officials wrote a letter saying they supported it as a way to "safeguard our national security" by limiting lawsuits against companies that supply weapons to the military.  "There's a subtle undertow here about buy America," Mr. Stearns said, adding, "This bill has picked up a little bit of steam because of that."  Mr. Stearns said he had been working to pass the legislation for six years. But the turning point came not in the House, which had previously passed a similar bill, but in the Senate, which has 55 Republicans after the 2004 elections. The stronger majority enabled Republicans to beat back Democratic amendments that had doomed the measure in the past.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The bill's passage was a bit of good news for President Bush and Congressional Republicans, who have been consumed by an intraparty budget battle in the House, the criticism over the Supreme Court nomination of Harriet E. Miers, a leak investigation involving the president's senior political adviser and the scheduled arraignment of Representative Tom DeLay, who was recently forced to step aside as majority leader, on charges of money laundering and conspiracy in Texas.  Mr. DeLay issued a statement calling the gun bill an important step toward revamping the nation's tort law system. On Wednesday, the House passed another measure, the so-called cheeseburger bill, which protects the restaurant industry from obesity-related lawsuits. Taken together, Mr. DeLay said, the bills "protect America's legal system for genuine plaintiffs."  There have been dozens of lawsuits against the gun industry in recent years, most of them dismissed by the courts. In response to those suits, Mr. LaPierre said, 33 states have adopted laws similar to the federal bill.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  While opponents of the measure said it singles out the gun industry for special protection, Mr. LaPierre said the protection is necessary because, unlike auto manufacturers or pharmaceutical companies, American firearms makers "don't have deep pockets," and the industry would be at risk simply from the cost of fighting the lawsuits.  But opponents called the bill shameful -- "bought and paid for by the N.R.A.," in the words of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. Representative Chris Van Hollen, Democrat of Maryland, whose constituents include victims of the 2002 sniper shootings in Washington and its suburbs, called the measure "a cruel hoax" on victims of gun violence.  "I went to a lot of memorial services during that period of time," Mr. Van Hollen said. "I've met with family members. To tell them that their cases were frivolous is, I think, to add insult to injury."  Eight of the sniper victims or their relatives won a $2.5 million legal settlement from the manufacturer of the gun used in the shootings and the dealer in Washington State who sold it. Mr. LaPierre said that suit would have been permitted under the law passed Thursday. But the lawyer who brought it, Dennis Henigan of the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, disagreed.  Mr. Henigan said that while the dealer had violated federal law, the bill would have prevented the suit nonetheless because the violations did not pertain directly to the weapon used in the sniper shootings. He said he intended to challenge the bill on constitutional grounds, arguing that it deprives states of their right to legislate and deprives victims of their right to sue.  "We're going to argue that this statute is literally unprecedented in American history," Mr. Henigan said, "because it is the first time that the federal government will be stepping in and retroactively depriving injured people of their vested legal rights under state law, without providing them any alternative."
Among other measures, the plan aims to better define who should be licensed as a gun dealer and thus be required to conduct background checks on customers to weed out prohibited buyers.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Even the administration said it was impossible to gauge how big an effect the steps might have, how many new gun sales might be regulated or how many illegal guns might be taken off the streets.  “I don’t think anyone can credibly tell you yet what all this means,” Charles E. James Jr., a former federal gun crimes prosecutor who now represents gun industry clients, said of Mr. Obama’s plan.  Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch told reporters Monday that she could not say whether the new restrictions would have had any effect in a series of recent mass shootings, including last month’s attack in San Bernardino, Calif., that left 14 dead. But in the massacre of nine people at a South Carolina church in June, the man charged, Dylan Roof, was able to buy a .45-caliber handgun despite admitting to drug use. The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, said at the time that a breakdown in the background check system had allowed Mr. Roof to buy the gun.  Mr. Obama voiced irritation over the issue.  “Each time this comes up,” Mr. Obama said in his speech, “we are fed the excuse that common-sense reforms like background checks might not have stopped the last massacre, or the one before that, or the one before that, so why bother trying. I reject that thinking. We know we can’t stop every act of violence, every act of evil in the world. But maybe we could try to stop one act of evil, one act of violence.”  Nearly 21 million gun sales were processed through the background check system in 2014, but some industry analysts say as many as 40 percent more firearms could have been sold through private transactions not subject to background checks. Even the most hopeful advocates say the new plan would affect only thousands of sales.  Proposals that would have the biggest effect have long been shelved by even the most ardent gun control advocates who now see an assault weapons ban or mandatory gun buyback programs like ones in Australia in 1996 and 2003 as political fantasy.  Modest as the new measures may prove to be, the response was unrestrained. Republican presidential candidates and congressional leaders greeted them with peals of protests and angry claims of a “gun grab” that would violate Second Amendment rights. Gun control advocates hailed them as a breakthrough in what has often been a losing battle to toughen firearms restrictions.  The families of gun victims and gun control activists crowded into the White House and watched Mr. Obama break down as he recalled the young children gunned down by an assailant in 2012 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “First graders,” the president said, his eyes drifting off and becoming red with tears. He wiped his face and paused to regain his composure: “Every time I think about those kids, it gets me mad.”  By taking action, Mr. Obama is purposely stoking a furious political debate that has roiled Congress and spilled over into the presidential campaign. Vowing last year to “politicize” the gun issue after a mass shooting at an Oregon community college, Mr. Obama on Tuesday made good on that promise.  The National Rifle Association, targeted by Mr. Obama in his speech, mocked his tears.  “The American people do not need more emotional, condescending lectures that are completely devoid of facts,” said Chris W. Cox, the group’s top lobbyist.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Republican presidential candidates also raced to condemn Mr. Obama, with Senator Ted Cruz of Texas putting up a web page with a menacing, altered picture of the president in a commando outfit. A caption read “Obama Wants Your Guns” next to a fund-raising appeal.  Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin posted his opposition on Twitter as the president spoke, saying Mr. Obama’s “words and actions amount to a form of intimidation that undermines liberty.”  But Mr. Obama’s allies were equally intense in their defense.  Dan Gross, the president of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, posted on Twitter from the East Room: “President wiping tears. So am I. One of the most moving things I’ve ever seen.”  Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate, posted a “thank you” to Mr. Obama for “taking a crucial step forward on gun violence.”  Mr. Obama’s plan is likely to face legal challenges from gun rights groups that accuse him of overstepping his executive authority. A number of critics said they suspected that the president’s push to “clarify” the definition of licensed gun dealers could force even the occasional gun seller to register their transactions.  Photo  Shortly before Mr. Obama’s remarks, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives released guidance to gun sellers on the criteria that could qualify someone as a gun “dealer” who needs to be licensed and conduct background checks. Those criteria include having a website, using business cards or selling new guns in their original packages.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The 14-page pamphlet, posted on the agency’s website, offers examples to help guide sellers, such as “Bob,” who wants to sell a gun collection that he inherited (he would not need to be licensed) and “Sharon,” who sells guns at flea markets every weekend (she would need to be licensed).  But the administration rejected more aggressive options, such as establishing a defined threshold for the number of gun sales that would qualify someone as a dealer required to conduct background checks.  White House officials were mindful of the legal reversals sustained when the president tried to grant legal immigration status by executive action to five million immigrants in the country illegally, and they said they tried to make the gun plan as safe from legal attacks as possible.  “This is really pretty modest stuff,” said Ladd Everitt, the communications director for the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence, an advocacy group.  Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum in Washington, who attended Mr. Obama’s speech, said many police organizations had been pushing for more background checks on firearm purchases. While he praised Mr. Obama for taking action, he said more needed to be done.  “If Congress doesn’t allow for legislation, I think he went as far as he could using the bully pulpit,” Mr. Wexler said.  With Congress unwilling to act, many gun control groups have turned to states for changes, with 18 states now imposing some form of background check.
Mr. McCain was born on a military installation in the Canal Zone, where his mother and father, a Navy officer, were stationed. His campaign advisers say they are comfortable that Mr. McCain meets the requirement and note that the question was researched for his first presidential bid in 1999 and reviewed again this time around.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But given mounting interest, the campaign recently asked Theodore B. Olson, a former solicitor general now advising Mr. McCain, to prepare a detailed legal analysis. “I don’t have much doubt about it,” said Mr. Olson, who added, though, that he still needed to finish his research.  Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and one of Mr. McCain’s closest allies, said it would be incomprehensible to him if the son of a military member born in a military station could not run for president.  “He was posted there on orders from the United States government,” Mr. Graham said of Mr. McCain’s father. “If that becomes a problem, we need to tell every military family that your kid can’t be president if they take an overseas assignment.”  The phrase “natural born” was in early drafts of the Constitution. Scholars say notes of the Constitutional Convention give away little of the intent of the framers. Its origin may be traced to a letter from John Jay to George Washington, with Jay suggesting that to prevent foreigners from becoming commander in chief, the Constitution needed to “declare expressly” that only a natural-born citizen could be president.  Ms. Duggin and others who have explored the arcane subject in depth say legal argument and basic fairness may indeed be on the side of Mr. McCain, a longtime member of Congress from Arizona. But multiple experts and scholarly reviews say the issue has never been definitively resolved by either Congress or the Supreme Court.  Ms. Duggin favors a constitutional amendment to settle the matter. Others have called on Congress to guarantee that Americans born outside the national boundaries can legitimately see themselves as potential contenders for the Oval Office.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “They ought to have the same rights,” said Don Nickles, a former Republican senator from Oklahoma who in 2004 introduced legislation that would have established that children born abroad to American citizens could harbor presidential ambitions without a legal cloud over their hopes. “There is some ambiguity because there has never been a court case on what ‘natural-born citizen’ means.”  Mr. McCain’s situation is different from those of the current governors of California and Michigan, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jennifer M. Granholm, who were born in other countries and were first citizens of those nations, rendering them naturalized Americans ineligible under current interpretations. The conflict that could conceivably ensnare Mr. McCain goes more to the interpretation of “natural born” when weighed against intent and decades of immigration law.  Mr. McCain is not the first person to find himself in these circumstances. The last Arizona Republican to be a presidential nominee, Barry Goldwater, faced the issue. He was born in the Arizona territory in 1909, three years before it became a state. But Goldwater did not win, and the view at the time was that since he was born in a continental territory that later became a state, he probably met the standard.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It also surfaced in the 1968 candidacy of George Romney, who was born in Mexico, but again was not tested. The former Connecticut politician Lowell P. Weicker Jr., born in Paris, sought a legal analysis when considering the presidency, an aide said, and was assured he was eligible. Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. was once viewed as a potential successor to his father, but was seen by some as ineligible since he had been born on Campobello Island in Canada. The 21st president, Chester A. Arthur, whose birthplace is Vermont, was rumored to have actually been born in Canada, prompting some to question his eligibility.  Quickly recognizing confusion over the evolving nature of citizenship, the First Congress in 1790 passed a measure that did define children of citizens “born beyond the sea, or out of the limits of the United States to be natural born.” But that law is still seen as potentially unconstitutional and was overtaken by subsequent legislation that omitted the “natural-born” phrase.  Mr. McCain’s citizenship was established by statutes covering the offspring of Americans abroad and laws specific to the Canal Zone as Congress realized that Americans would be living and working in the area for extended periods. But whether he qualifies as natural-born has been a topic of Internet buzz for months, with some declaring him ineligible while others assert that he meets all the basic constitutional qualifications — a natural-born citizen at least 35 years of age with 14 years of residence.  “I don’t think he has any problem whatsoever,” said Mr. Nickles, a McCain supporter. “But I wouldn’t be a bit surprised if somebody is going to try to make an issue out of it. If it goes to court, I think he will win.”  Lawyers who have examined the topic say there is not just confusion about the provision itself, but uncertainty about who would have the legal standing to challenge a candidate on such grounds, what form a challenge could take and whether it would have to wait until after the election or could be made at any time.  In a paper written 20 years ago for the Yale Law Journal on the natural-born enigma, Jill Pryor, now a lawyer in Atlanta, said that any legal challenge to a presidential candidate born outside national boundaries would be “unpredictable and unsatisfactory.”  “If I were on the Supreme Court, I would decide for John McCain,” Ms. Pryor said in a recent interview. “But it is certainly not a frivolous issue.”
“With Jeb’s attitude, we will never be great again, that I can tell you — we will never be great again,” Mr. Trump said, to loud boos.  In the evening’s other major subplot, Mr. Rubio, who has increased his attacks on the surging Mr. Cruz over the last month, engaged his colleague in their most pointed face-to-face confrontation yet. Trying to defuse criticism over his leading role in the 2013 legislation to offer unauthorized immigrants a path to citizenship, Mr. Rubio asserted that Mr. Cruz also wanted to offer legal status to those immigrants.  Mr. Cruz said Mr. Rubio was trying to “muddy the waters” and “raise confusion,” and linked Mr. Rubio to Mr. Schumer and President Obama on the issue.  “I led the fight against his legalization and amnesty” bill, Mr. Cruz said, arguing that to claim his and Mr. Rubio’s records on the issue were the same was “like suggesting the fireman and the arsonist have the same record because they were both at the scene of the fire.”  But when pressed by Mr. Rubio and a moderator on whether he would rule out legalizing undocumented immigrants, Mr. Cruz appeared to leave himself a measure of space.  “I have never supported legalization, and I do not intend to support legalization,” he said.  The exchanges between Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz, who have emerged as leading candidates recently, highlighted the party’s most glaring divisions: on immigration, intelligence gathering and foreign intervention.  Mr. Rubio has positioned himself as a Republican who would have been at home in the George W. Bush administration, a hawk on national security but a pragmatist on immigration. (He has, though, backed off his support for a comprehensive immigration overhaul in the face of scathing criticism from the right.)  Mr. Cruz, by contrast, has tried to run as a post-Bush Republican, taking a hard line on immigration while seeking a middle ground between the party’s interventionists and libertarians on defense issues.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After Mr. Rubio tried to portray him as soft on national security, Mr. Cruz linked him to Democratic foreign policy on crises like Libya.  “One of the problems with Marco’s foreign policy is he has far too often supported Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama undermining governments in the Middle East that have helped radical Islamic terrorists,” Mr. Cruz said. “We need to focus on killing the bad guys, not getting stuck in Middle Eastern civil wars that don’t keep America safe.”  Mr. Rubio shot back that while Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton wanted to “lead from behind,” Mr. Cruz was suggesting “not to lead at all.”  Safety and fear have not loomed so powerfully over a debate, or an electorate, since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. But if the threat of terrorism has become the defining issue in the race, Republicans are sharply divided on the toughest and smartest strategies to prevent more attacks.  The candidates used words like “angry” and “betrayed” as they described an America besieged by terrorist threats and exposed and vulnerable after seven years of Mr. Obama’s leadership, which they argued Mrs. Clinton, who polls show is leading the Democratic race, would only continue.  Photo  The campaign’s new focus on terrorism was on display when Mr. Cruz was questioned about his vote to halt the National Security Agency’s ability to collect bulk phone data. He framed the measure, which ended elements of the Patriot Act, as a “reform of how we target bad guys” and argued that it had actually helped fight terrorism.  Mr. Rubio, though, kept the focus on ending the bulk data collection, arguing that Mr. Cruz had given away “a valuable tool” against terrorism.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I promise you, the next time there is an attack on this country, the first thing people are going to want to know is, why didn’t we know about it and why didn’t we stop it?” Mr. Rubio said. “And the answer better not be, ‘Because we didn’t have access to records or information that would have allowed us to identify these killers before they attack.’ ”  Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, though, came to Mr. Cruz’s defense with a fierce attack on Mr. Rubio. Mr. Paul, who has sought to revive his languishing campaign by reasserting his libertarianism, mocked Mr. Rubio for proclaiming himself “great and strong on national defense” when, Mr. Paul said, he was “the weakest of all the candidates on immigration.”  “He has more of an allegiance to Chuck Schumer and the liberals than he does on conservative policy,” Mr. Paul said, referring to Mr. Rubio’s work with Mr. Schumer on an immigration overhaul.  Forced to respond to Mr. Trump’s proposal to bar Muslims from America, Mr. Cruz — who is ahead of Mr. Trump in Iowa in one poll — and Mr. Rubio, who has also been gaining strength, only briefly registered their opposition before focusing their fire on Mr. Obama.  Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, enjoying a measure of good timing, won applause at the Las Vegas debate after the bickering among Mr. Cruz, Mr. Paul and Mr. Rubio by disparaging their place of employment and emphasizing his executive experience.  “This is the difference between having been a federal prosecutor and actually doing something, and just spending your life as one of 100 debating it,” he said. “Let’s talk about how we do this and not about which bill these guys like more. People don’t care about that.”  Mr. Christie repeatedly assailed Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton, saying they had understated the threat from Islamic State terrorists, and argued for more muscular intelligence-gathering tools to “protect the safety and security of Americans.”  But his judgment came under a rare attack from a fellow Republican for his aides’ closing of entrances to the George Washington Bridge. “When we think about the judgment of someone who might want World War III, we might think about someone who might shut down a bridge,” Mr. Paul said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio, too, called for more aggressive government surveillance of suspected terrorists. Mr. Bush, while also urging strong law enforcement actions, endorsed the sentiment of President George W. Bush, who said “Islam is peace” after the Sept. 11 attacks.  “We can’t dissociate ourselves from peace-loving Muslims,” Mr. Bush said, responding to a moderator’s question. Reiterating his months-old plan against the Islamic State, he said: “It requires leadership. It’s not filing an amendment and call it a success. It’s about developing a strategy, leading the world.”  Negative exchanges — in word choice, tone, put-downs and facial expressions — dominated the debate, the fifth and final one of the year for the Republicans. The contentiousness reflected an intensely competitive race and a widely held belief among the candidates that anxiety-ridden voters are looking for the fiercest possible nominee — not only against the Islamic State, but also against the likely Democratic candidate, Mrs. Clinton.  The assault on Mr. Trump began in the debate’s opening statements, with Mr. Paul comparing him to totalitarian Chinese officials because he supports monitoring the Internet for suspicious activity. Mr. Bush quickly picked up the theme, saying Mr. Trump was not a serious candidate but merely “great at the one-liners.”  “He is a chaos candidate; he would be a chaos president,” Mr. Bush said. “He would not be the commander in chief we need to keep our country safe.”  Mr. Trump dismissed Mr. Bush’s attacks as the flailing of a fading candidate.  “Jeb doesn’t really believe I’m unhinged,” he said. “He said that very simply because he has failed in this campaign. It’s been a total disaster. Nobody cares.”  Mr. Bush, who grew tougher as the night went on, responded repeatedly that Mr. Trump was not a serious candidate. “Banning all Muslims will make it harder for us to do exactly what we need to do, which is to destroy ISIS,” he said.  Later, Mr. Bush delivered one of the most biting lines of the night, alluding to a past remark by Mr. Trump about where he got his military advice. “I won’t get my information from the shows,” Mr. Bush said. “I don’t know if that’s Saturday morning or Sunday morning.”  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Any expectation that Mr. Cruz and Mr. Trump would clash was snuffed out when Mr. Trump was read back his criticism of Mr. Cruz from last weekend — when he called Mr. Cruz “a maniac” — and retreated from it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “He’s just fine,” Mr. Trump said, reaching over to pat Mr. Cruz on the back. “Don’t worry about it.”  Earlier, Mr. Cruz engaged Mr. Trump in a bit of bonhomie, joking that he would build a border wall, “and I’ll get Donald Trump to pay for it.”  “I’ll do it!” Mr. Trump responded.  Mr. Trump, after suggesting in recent weeks that he might abandon the party, appeared to reiterate his pledge from earlier in the year that he would not run as a third-party candidate.  And in an interview on CNN after the debate, Mr. Trump was unambiguous. “Yes, I’m a Republican, and I’m going to be a Republican,” he said. “I’m not going to be doing a third-party.”  Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon who enjoyed a burst of popularity this fall but has fallen in polls amid questions about his lack of national security experience, salted his remarks with statistics and other evidence of greater preparation. But he was otherwise a low-key presence in the debate, and complained that a “false narrative” had emerged about his readiness to lead the country.  “I have a lot of experience building things, organizing things — a national scholarship program,” Mr. Carson said. “Some people say, ‘You’re weak because you’re not loud and you’re not boisterous and you’re not rude.’ But the fact of the matter is, look and see what I’ve done, and that speaks volumes about strength.”
WASHINGTON — President Obama on Wednesday fired his top Afghanistan war commander after only a brief meeting in the Oval Office, replacing Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal with his boss and mentor, Gen. David H. Petraeus, and sending a clear signal that the current war strategy will continue despite setbacks and growing public doubts.  Two hours later, an angry Mr. Obama privately reprimanded members of his bickering national security team, adopting a “stern” tone during a meeting in the Situation Room and ordering them to put aside “pettiness,” and not to put “personalities or reputation” ahead of American troops who have been put in harm’s way, administration officials said.  Speaking in the Rose Garden to reporters, Mr. Obama said he did not fire General McChrystal for critical comments about him and his staff in Rolling Stone magazine, nor “out of any sense of personal insult.” Rather, the president cited the need for his team to unite in pressing the war effort.  “I don’t think we can sustain that unity of effort and achieve our objectives in Afghanistan without making this change,” he said.  Even by the standards of a capital that has seen impeachment and scandals in recent years, the drama surrounding the firing of a wartime commander was palpable.  Generals have come and gone in disputes over policy and execution — indeed, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates fired General McChrystal’s predecessor, Gen. David D. McKiernan, just a year ago. But the removal of General McChrystal culminated a remarkable public waiting game, with White House and top military officials trying to guess what the president would do, and Mr. Obama keeping his cards close to his vest until the very end.  While publicly rebuking him Tuesday, Mr. Obama had said he would not decide the general’s fate until they met face to face. But as early as Monday night, officials said, when Mr. Obama first learned of the Rolling Stone article in which General McChrystal and his staff criticized administration officials, the president and his advisers were discussing the likelihood that the general would have to go.  “A lot of us were arguing that the message of letting McChrystal’s comments roll off our backs would be enormously harmful,” one administration official said.  By Tuesday, when the president met with the general’s biggest supporter and a powerful one, Secretary Gates, White House and Pentagon officials were already discussing General Petraeus as the most likely replacement.  It has been nearly 60 years since President Harry S. Truman fired Gen. Douglas MacArthur in the midst of the Korean War, the last time a president directly stepped in to remove the senior commander in a war zone for disrespect toward the White House. For Mr. Obama, this was a MacArthur moment, a reassertion of civilian control.  The president also used the moment to emphasize that the policy in Afghanistan would not change, even as his own party and international allies display strong doubts about the way forward, including whether the United States can ever navigate a troubled relationship with Afghanistan’s president, Hamid Karzai.  General Petraeus is taking a step down. As head of United States Central Command, he has oversight for Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and the entire region. He has supported General McChrystal’s point of view during internal administration strategy debates. His appointment is meant in part to calm the nerves of NATO allies and Mr. Karzai.  Mr. Obama called Mr. Karzai Wednesday to try to get the Afghan president on board — Mr. Karzai made a personal appeal to Mr. Obama on Tuesday night to keep General McChrystal — and Mr. Obama received at least an initial public statement that “President Karzai respects President Obama’s decision.”  Gen. James L. Jones, the national security adviser, whom one of General McChrystal’s aides had dismissed in the article as a “clown,” called his counterparts in Europe to assure them that Mr. Obama was not abandoning his approach. He repeated Mr. Obama’s line that this was a change in personnel, not in policy.  The president chose General Petraeus, a media-savvy, ambitious officer, instead of lesser-known figures who might have had more trouble stepping in to such a volatile situation. “The one person you could have inserted in there to calm those nerves was Dave Petraeus,” said one senior administration official.  General Petraeus will have to relinquish the top job at Central Command to assume command in Afghanistan. White House officials said no decision had been made on who would succeed him.
Photo  Donald J. Trump said Saturday that he would order surveillance of “certain mosques” to combat terrorism after the Paris attacks and claimed to have watched as “thousands and thousands of people were cheering” while the World Trade Center towers fell on Sept. 11, 2001.  In a rally at the Birmingham-Jefferson Convention Complex in Birmingham, Ala., Mr. Trump, who is seeking the Republican presidential nomination, dismissed accounts of his apparent support for creating a registry of Muslims in the United States as an effort by the news media to entrap him. He then seemed to clarify that idea on Saturday, saying he wanted a database of refugees entering the country from Syria and adding, to cheers, “I want surveillance of certain mosques, O.K.?”  “We’ve had it before and we’ll have it again,” he added. Mr. Trump has recently spoken of the New York Police Department’s use of informants in mosques after the Sept. 11 attacks.  Photo  It is unclear whether a database of Syrian refugees would be markedly different from the records already being kept in screening by federal agencies. But Mr. Trump, the leading Republican candidate in some polls, has been perhaps the most strident of all the contenders on the issue of whether to accept refugees after the Paris attacks, raising the possibility that some extremists could slip in among them and telling the crowd Saturday that should he win the presidency, the refugees are “going back, we can’t have them.”  Earlier this year, Mr. Trump said that accepting a limited number of refugees from Syria was a humanitarian decision.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Perhaps the most striking comment of the day was his recounting of the Sept. 11 attacks as he talked about the security landscape since the Paris massacre:  “Hey, I watched when the World Trade Center came tumbling down. And I watched in Jersey City, New Jersey, where thousands and thousands of people were cheering as that building was coming down. Thousands of people were cheering. So something’s going on. We’ve got to find out what it is.”  It was not clear what Mr. Trump was referring to. There were cheers of support in some Middle Eastern countries that day, which were broadcast on television. But a persistent Internet rumor of Muslims celebrating in Paterson, N.J., was discounted by police officials at the time. A search of news accounts from that period shows no reports of mass cheering in Jersey City.  Ibrahim Hooper, a spokesman for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said the response of Muslim-Americans on Sept. 11 was disgust.  “I know because I wrote it,” he said of the council’s reaction, adding that if Mr. Trump had evidence of cheering, he should present it.  Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, would not elaborate on his comments; his aides have repeatedly declined to make him available to address the controversies over some of his statements. Ms. Hicks said only that Mr. Trump had drawn an “unprecedented” crowd of 10,000 in Birmingham, adding, “Mr. Trump’s speech was great and unbelievably well received.”  Since the Nov. 13 attacks in Paris by Islamic extremists, which killed 130 people, the national mood has turned against admitting refugees from Syria, where the Islamic State has taken control of certain areas, a poll by Bloomberg Politics showed last week. And Mr. Trump has been riding a wave of anger and mistrust of government and politicians since he entered the race in June.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump’s calls for surveillance came after he said earlier in the week that he supported closing some mosques. He has not been alone in making such calls; a top donor to Hillary Rodham Clinton also urged such surveillance in the wake of the Paris attacks. The donor, Haim Saban, later said he had misspoken.  The rest of Saturday’s speech was a classic Trump performance, a crowd-pleasing stream of boasts, humor and mockery. Referring to George E. Pataki, the former New York governor who has been lagging badly in polls and was one of several opponents to seek airtime from NBC after Mr. Trump hosted the network’s “Saturday Night Live,” he said: “They could give him 12 ‘Saturday Night Lives,’ an hour and a half a night — not going to have any impact.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At one point during the rally, a protester whom Mr. Trump called to have ejected — “Get him the hell out of here,” he ordered security guards — was punched and kicked by some attendees, CNN reported.  The protester, who wore a shirt saying “Black Lives Matter” and refused to leave the rally, was hit by roughly a half-dozen attendees, CNN said. The police told the network that the man had not required medical attention.  Ms. Hicks did not respond to an email asking about the removal of the protester.
Even with the congressional action, the government will continue to maintain robust surveillance power, an authority highlighted by Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, whose opposition to the phone records program forced it to be shut down at 12:01 a.m. Monday. Mr. Paul and other critics of the legislation said the government’s reach into individuals’ lives remained too intrusive.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The bill cleared the Senate 67 to 32 after a fierce floor fight; at least four of the opponents voted no because they felt the bill did not go far enough.  Mr. Obama was quick to praise passage of the legislation and to scold those who opposed it.  “After a needless delay and inexcusable lapse in important national security authorities, my administration will work expeditiously to ensure our national security professionals again have the full set of vital tools they need to continue protecting the country,” Mr. Obama said. “Just as important, enactment of this legislation will strengthen civil liberty safeguards and provide greater public confidence in these programs.”  The Senate’s longest-serving member, Patrick J. Leahy, the seven-term Democrat of Vermont, said the legislation, which he co-sponsored, represented “the most significant surveillance reform in decades.”  The fight for the changes was led largely by Democrats and a new generation of Republicans in the House and the Senate who were elected a decade after the terrorist attacks. Even as threats have multiplied since then, privacy concerns, stoked by reports of widespread computer security breaches at private companies, have shifted public opinion.  Video  “National security and privacy are not mutually exclusive,” said Senator James Lankford, Republican of Oklahoma, a freshman who like several other younger Republicans voted against the senior senator from his state. “They can both be accomplished through responsible intelligence gathering and careful respect for the freedoms of law-abiding Americans.”  Tuesday’s vote was a rebuke to Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, who, until the end in a bitter floor speech, maintained the bill was a dangerous diminishment of national security. Lawmakers in both parties beat back amendments — one by one — that he insisted were necessary to blunt some of the bill’s controls on government spying.  Mr. McConnell blasted his fellow senators — and by association Speaker John A. Boehner, who heartily endorsed the measure — as taking “one more tool away from those who defend our country every day.”  “This is a significant weakening of the tools that were put in place in the wake of 9/11 to protect the country,” he said. “I think Congress is misreading the public mood if they think Americans are concerned about the privacy implications.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But even scores of senators who loathed the actions of Mr. Snowden voted for the legislation.  The legislation’s goals are twofold: to rein in aspects of the government’s data collection authority and to crack open the workings of the secret national security court that oversees it. After six months, the phone companies, not the N.S.A., will hold the bulk phone records — logs of calls placed from one number to another, and the time and the duration of those contacts, but not the content of what was said. A new kind of court order will permit the government to swiftly analyze them.  The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, for the first time, will be required to declassify some of its most significant decisions, and outside voices will be allowed to argue for privacy rights before the court in certain cases.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The battle over the legislation, the USA Freedom Act, made for unusual alliances. Mr. Boehner joined forces with Mr. Obama, the bipartisan leadership of the House Judiciary Committee, and a bipartisan coalition of senators against Mr. McConnell and his Intelligence Committee chairman, Senator Richard Burr, Republican of North Carolina.  Mr. McConnell made a series of miscalculations, stretching back to last year, when he filibustered a similar surveillance overhaul measure. Last month, after Republicans blocked consideration of the Freedom Act, Mr. McConnell sent the Senate on a weeklong Memorial Day recess, pushing Washington up against a June 1 deadline, when surveillance authority would lapse.  That empowered Mr. Paul, who promised supporters of his presidential campaign that he would single-handedly ensure that surveillance authority lapsed, a promise on which he delivered. When Mr. McConnell then argued in favor of amending the Freedom Act, senators in both parties — even some who supported him — said any changes would only extend the surveillance blackout and risk the country’s security.  Photo  Mr. McConnell dragged senators back for an unusual Sunday session, only to end up with the very bill he tried to kill.  “This should have been planned on over a week ago,” said Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, who had backed Mr. McConnell’s efforts but found his timing untenable.  In a heated meeting of House Republicans on Tuesday morning, one of the architects of the post-Sept. 11 USA Patriot Act, Representative Jim Sensenbrenner of Wisconsin, angrily told Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, an emissary from the Senate leadership, to deliver a message to his colleagues: Any change to the House bill would be flatly rejected.  About a dozen Republican senators — most of them recent House members — took the warning to heart, joined Democrats and voted down all of Mr. McConnell’s proposed changes.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As the debate over the bulk phone records program unfolded, supporters and opponents both trotted out worst case scenarios to make their argument. Opponents warned that the government could root through the records to learn who was calling psychiatrists and political groups, while supporters said ending it would lead to terrorist attacks on the United States.  Neither of those warnings was supported by how the program had performed in its nearly 14 years of existence. Repeated studies found no evidence of intentional abuse for personal or political gain, but also found no evidence that it had ever thwarted a terrorist attack.  Still, the debaters on each side also made other points. Opponents said that the mere collection of Americans’ calling records by the government was a privacy violation and that it risked being abused in the future. Supporters said it had helped flesh out investigations in other ways, and could still prove to be crucial in the future.  Senator Mike Lee, a Utah Republican, and Senator Leahy made it clear after passage that curtailing the phone sweeps might be only the beginning. The two are collaborating on legislation to undo a provision in the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 that allows the government to read the contents of email over six months old. House members and senators from both parties are already eyeing a section of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act that they say has also been abused by the government.  But opponents of the law said they imagined further fights going forward for their positions, too. Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, said she and others would continue to seek reforms and oversight.  “It’s not the end,” she said.
“It is unprecedented in modern history to have the level of complexity of global substantial business relationships that the president-elect has, and the litigation that inevitably follows any complex global business venture,” said Norman L. Eisen, a former special counsel for ethics and government reform under President Obama, who supported Mr. Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton. “It will be complicated, but not insurmountable.”  Photo  Mr. Trump faces potential conflicts on multiple fronts. He has income streams that could be affected by taxation policies he may try to get through Congress. His companies have hundreds of millions of dollars of debt from banks regulated by the federal government. In one case, Mr. Trump is a part owner of an office building in Manhattan that carries a $950 million loan from lenders that include the Bank of China.  A key source of his revenue is the licensing of the Trump name, both domestically and abroad, and the value of that brand could be helped, or harmed, by actions he takes or does not take.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Trump Organization said it had begun the process of “vetting various structures,” with a goal of quickly transferring the businesses to three of Mr. Trump’s children — Donald Jr., Ivanka and Eric — along with executives. “This is a top priority at the Organization and the structure that is ultimately selected will comply with all applicable rules and regulations,” Amanda Miller, a marketing executive for the company, wrote in an email.  During a debate in January, Mr. Trump said he would put his holdings in a blind trust, an arrangement in which a public official lets a financial manager control his wealth and does not know exactly how the money is invested. But in the next breath, he acknowledged the problem with that strategy: “Well, I don’t know if it’s a blind trust if Ivanka, Don and Eric run it.”  In an interview, Alan Garten, a lawyer for the Trump Organization, spoke of the difficulty of the task. “There has been a huge event — a historic event — that has occurred,” he said. “There is no question that makes my job more complicated.”  Under federal laws, executive branch employees must comply with conflict-of-interest rules that guard against being influenced by personal investments, and they must curb payments from sources outside the government. As a result, employees may have to recuse themselves from working on matters where they may have conflicts, holding certain properties or accepting money. For example, when Henry Paulson, the former Goldman Sachs executive, became Treasury secretary in 2006, he pledged to sell about $470 million in company stock to comply with conflict-of-interest rules.  Photo  But the president and vice president were exempted from such laws, on the theory that they needed to be able to carry out their constitutional duties without restraint. So President Trump will be able to take actions pertaining to another country even if he has business interests there.  Federal laws like those against bribery and receiving benefits from foreign countries still apply to the president. Enforcement would fall to the Justice Department or to Congress, which could pursue criminal or impeachment proceedings if evidence suggests laws were broken.  Mr. Trump will be required next year to file an updated personal financial disclosure listing his holdings, similar to the forms he has filed the past couple of years as a candidate. But Mr. Trump will not be required to make public his income tax returns, which he declined to do during the campaign, citing a continuing audit by the Internal Revenue Service, an agency he will now control. If he did release them, the tax returns could provide transparency into his international business dealings and other potential conflicts that may arise.  As president, Mr. Trump will have no protection from lawsuits related to his life outside the White House, a result of the 1997 Supreme Court ruling that President Clinton could be sued by Ms. Jones in a sexual harassment case that dated to his time as Arkansas’s governor. That litigation, which ended in an $850,000 settlement but no admission of wrongdoing, preoccupied Mr. Clinton in his second term and indirectly led to his impeachment.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  That ruling could set a trap for Mr. Trump — who has been accused by several women of unwanted advances, though none are currently suing him — and present a strategy for his political opponents to hamper his administration with litigation, legal experts said.  “I anticipate that is going to be one of the first line of attacks against President Trump,” said Richard W. Painter, the chief White House ethics lawyer under President George W. Bush from 2005 to 2007, who endorsed Mrs. Clinton. “It is potentially very destructive for the country as it was with Clinton.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  On Thursday, as Mr. Trump was in Washington meeting with President Obama and congressional leaders, his lawyers were in court in San Diego for a lengthy hearing related to the Trump University lawsuit, in which former students allege they were cheated out of thousands of dollars in tuition through deceptive promises and high-pressure sales tactics.  Mr. Trump has rejected the allegations. But on Thursday, one of his lawyers, Daniel Petrocelli, told the judge, Gonzalo P. Curiel — whom Mr. Trump accused of bias because of his Mexican heritage — that he was open to discussing a settlement in the case.  Mr. Petrocelli also said he might request to delay the trial to next year, saying more time was necessary because “we’re in uncharted territories” in light of Mr. Trump’s election, The Associated Press reported. Trump University is also the subject of a lawsuit by the New York attorney general. That case will also continue.  Mr. Trump and his businesses are enmeshed in myriad other litigation. Mr. Trump has been engaged in a lengthy dispute with Palm Beach County over jetliners flying over his Mar-a-Lago resort on the way to and from the nearby airport. In a lawsuit, he claimed that the noise, vibrations and emissions from the aircraft are disruptive to guests and damaging the property, including the Dorian stone and antique Cuban roof tiles.  And in Washington, Mr. Trump has sued two celebrity chefs, Geoffrey Zakarian and José Andrés, after they backed out of restaurant deals at his new hotel development at the Old Post Office Pavilion after he made incendiary comments last year about Mexican immigrants.  The Old Post Office project itself is a potential conflict. The Trump Organization signed a 60-year deal with the federal government to redevelop and manage the building as a hotel — meaning that he will be, in a sense, his own landlord.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Vice President-elect Mike Pence made his name as a relentless conservative critic of the federal government. Soon he will essentially be running it.  Given the dearth of hands-on Washington experience in the inner circle of President-elect Donald J. Trump, Mr. Pence, a former Republican congressman, is emerging as a commanding figure in the administration taking shape as well as the chief conduit between Capitol Hill and the White House.  “My guess is he will be one of the most involved, day-to-day, managerial vice presidents in the history of the republic,” said Representative Jeb Hensarling, a senior Republican from Texas and a close ally from Mr. Pence’s days on Capitol Hill.  The announcement on Friday that Mr. Pence, who served 12 years in the House after his election in 2000, would be taking over management of the transition from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey was just more reassurance for top congressional Republicans who intend to rely heavily on him as their point man at the Trump White House. His selection as Mr. Trump’s running mate this summer calmed congressional Republicans jittery about the Trump candidacy.  Comparisons with Dick Cheney, considered a uniquely powerful No. 2 when he served with President George W. Bush, are already being made.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, said he had encouraged Mr. Pence to attend weekly party lunches in the Capitol just as Mr. Cheney did.  “We all really like Mike Pence,” Mr. McConnell said. “If you’ve asked any of us who’ve served with him, everybody likes him.”  To Washington Republicans, Mr. Pence is one of them, someone who can speak the argot of Congress and knows a C.R. (continuing resolution) from a C.B.O. score (Congressional Budget Office cost estimate).  “Trump had the vision and the passion and he understood about the forgotten man and woman,” Mr. Hensarling said. “Mike is a guy who can take that vision and passion and turn it into policy and then turn that policy into legislative language and then turn that language into bills that can reach the president’s desk.”  Mr. Pence also called Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, this week, but the two former congressional colleagues did little beyond exchange pleasantries and agree to meet in the future.  To Democrats, it is more than a little worrisome that Mr. Pence, a strong Christian conservative on social as well as fiscal issues, will be playing such a central role in the new administration.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Mike Pence is one of the most ideologically rigid individuals I’ve served with,” said Representative Steve Israel, a senior Democrat from New York, who is retiring. “Trump is putting the extreme right wing at the center of gravity in his administration, and that should be worrying to mainstream voters.”  Mr. Pence came to Congress as a rebel willing to challenge the priorities of his own party’s leadership. He was part of the leading edge of Tea Party-style Republicans eager to shake up Washington, but landed in the party leadership before leaving to run for governor of Indiana, a post that has provided him with government executive experience that could also prove valuable in his new role.  In the House, he was among the leaders of the effort to ban earmarks — spending sought by lawmakers for their home districts, popular at the time — and he was a strong advocate for cutting government spending over all. He opposed the expansion of Medicare to include prescription drug coverage — then a major priority of his party and the Bush White House. He led the Republican Study Committee, then the most conservative House Republicans, and was beaten badly in his first leadership race — a campaign that Mr. Hensarling notes he managed — before being elected to the No. 3 post of Republican Conference chairman in 2008.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As governor, Mr. Pence also instituted aspects of the Affordable Care Act in his state and accepted federal money to do so — a departure from how many other Republican governors responded to the new law. That experience could give him added expertise as the Republican Congress moves to dismantle the health program that is a signature of the Obama era and a top target of Mr. Trump’s.  Mr. Pence could also serve as a handy buffer between Mr. Trump and Speaker Paul D. Ryan, who clashed with Mr. Trump during the campaign but in recent weeks has sought to minimize any differences. In remarks after the election, Mr. Ryan has gone out of his way to note his close relationship and frequent contact with Mr. Pence.  “Mike Pence is a good man, a principled conservative, and he will make a great vice president,” Mr. Ryan told reporters this week.  Delegating significant authority to Mr. Pence jibes with Mr. Trump’s image as more of a chairman-of-the-board figure who leaves the details to others — and in Washington, there are a lot of details.  But Mr. Pence’s friends do not expect to him to push his role beyond what is expected, and they say he remains very deferential to Mr. Trump.  “Mike knows he was elected vice president, not president,” Mr. Hensarling said. “He knows who the boss is. Trump’s the boss.”  But in Washington, Mr. Pence is quickly coming to be seen as a highly empowered No. 2.
There has been weeping at West Wing staff meetings and a series of presidential pep talks, a tear-jerker of a Rose Garden gathering and anguished conversations about what will happen to President Obama’s legacy and the job prospects of his aides.  Since Donald J. Trump shocked both political parties and won the presidential election on Tuesday, a White House that had expected to spend the week celebrating a historic victory that would cement Mr. Obama’s most cherished initiatives for years to come is instead experiencing the seven stages of grief.  “It started with sadness and disbelief and definitely some tears around the building,” said one senior official who spoke on the condition of anonymity, unwilling to be quoted by name in detailing the crying or dwelling on the sense of loss hanging over the West Wing.  “Now it’s, ‘Let’s take a moment to digest,’ but also, ‘Let’s quickly pull ourselves up by our bootstraps because we need to continue to do our jobs,’” the official added.  A second senior official said she felt Hillary Clinton’s loss in her gut.  “I was actually physically ill for a while,” she said. “The only time I cried was when she came out and said, ‘I’m sorry,’” she added, referring to Mrs. Clinton’s concession speech on Wednesday in a hotel ballroom, when the candidate herself briefly teared up.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A cocktail party later that day for senior officials and cabinet members past and present felt “like sitting shiva,” one attendee said, referring to the weeklong Jewish mourning ritual in which friends and family grieve over a steady stream of refreshments.  Through it all, Mr. Obama has played the role of consoler in chief, pulling staff members into the Oval Office or dropping in on their meetings to buck them up, reassure them and tell them that this, too, shall pass.  Mr. Trump’s victory is a particularly bitter pill to swallow for the younger generation of aides in the White House, including many who had their first campaign experience as junior staff members on Mr. Obama’s improbable 2008 bid. They remember only one type of feeling the day after a presidential election: the euphoria of a history-making victory, coupled with a sense of invincibility from beating the odds.  This is the opposite of that.  In his private sympathy sessions, according to people who have attended, Mr. Obama has encouraged aides not to allow themselves to sink into despair.  “You don’t need hope when things are going well,” he tells them. “You need it when things are not going well.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The funereal air that hung over the White House in the first hours after Mr. Trump’s victory has given way to a more brave-faced solemnity, as Mr. Obama’s team turns its attention to ensuring a smooth transition to the next administration. His aides say they are determined not to appear bitter or petty at a moment when the president is trying to telegraph professionalism and grace.  But the truth is that they are all reeling, trying to process how they could have been so blindsided by Tuesday’s result, stung by the notion that the nation has just repudiated everything they have worked for, and wondering how different their lives will look from what they imagined a week ago.  “Everybody’s sort of recalibrating and regrouping,” said Kathleen Sebelius, the former secretary of health and human services, who attended Wednesday’s reception at the White House. Former officials flew to Washington from around the country to participate in what was supposed to be a celebration of Mrs. Clinton’s victory but felt more like a group therapy session, she said.  “It wasn’t quite a funeral — more like a memorial service,” she said. “It was a celebration of what we had done together, but with some ominous thoughts about what happens now.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama was upbeat, telling cabinet members how proud he was of the work they had done and the difference they had made for the good of the country.  “It was helpful to hear him talk about it and to share some time with one another,” Ms. Sebelius said. “We had a pretty amazing group of people who came to serve this president, and I think all of us felt good about that. Terrible about the election result, but good about that.”  Still, Mr. Obama’s efforts to accentuate the positive and the orderly passing of the baton are, in some sense, all the more jarring to members of his team who want nothing more than to hear him rail against Mr. Trump and all that he represents.  “Everyone who worked so hard on these issues is feeling an actual sense of loss and, because of the unexpected nature of this, like something was really yanked away from us,” said one former official who attended Wednesday’s party. “And now the president can’t be the voice for the Obama community at the time that it’s needed the most. It’s really disorienting.”
“Anybody who watches the news knows we need to have law and order reinstalled and we need to have more support for Blue Lives Matter,” she said, referring to the pro-police slogan that became a retort to the protests.  Photo  In recent interviews, other supporters of Mr. Trump have said they want him to institute curfews in city neighborhoods and to increase funding to drug treatment programs. They also expressed approval for widespread use of stop-and-frisk, the police practice of stopping and sometimes searching people in high-crime areas.  While supporters of the practice say it helps officers find illegal weapons and bring down homicide rates, it became a source of enormous tension between the police and black residents in the cities that deployed it. A federal judge in New York struck down the tactic as unconstitutional in 2013, saying the way the city was using it violated the rights of minorities. But if it were ever reinstated, it could one day land in front of a Supreme Court with Trump appointees who could be more open to its use.  “Donald Trump has proposed nothing short of a police state,” said Brittany Packnett, an activist who served on President Obama’s task force on 21st-century policing. “This is backlash to a black president, a black movement and black people being self-determined, bold and unapologetic.”  Mr. Trump’s ability to impose stop-and-frisk, should he follow through on his campaign talk, would be limited by the fact that local police and sheriff’s departments control most aspects of law enforcement. His administration could conceivably use grants to encourage local departments to adopt his policies, much in the way that President Bill Clinton’s Justice Department handed out money to encourage the hiring of tens of thousands of new officers around the country.  Mr. Trump’s Justice Department will have another pressing policy matter: how aggressively to pursue investigations against the police.  Under Mr. Obama, the department has often taken the lead on police violence cases, sometimes looking into prosecuting officers on charges of civil rights violations after local prosecutors declined to charge them or juries declined to convict. The department has in the last couple of years demanded changes from a number of police departments, including in Ferguson, Mo., where it found that officers were violating the constitutional rights of black residents, and in Cleveland, where it found a pattern of “unreasonable and unnecessary use of force” that resulted in dangerous and reckless behavior by officers. Both inquiries came after black residents were killed by local officers.  “What role does he see for his Justice Department in dealing with use-of-force issues, pattern and practice investigations, and the overall role of the Justice Department vis-à-vis local law enforcement?” Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, said of Mr. Trump. “We really don’t know yet.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  One of the first issues Mr. Trump’s Justice Department is likely to have to deal with is the case of Mr. Garner, whose dying words, “I can’t breathe,” became a nationwide rallying cry. In December 2014, a state grand jury in Staten Island decided not to bring charges against Officer Daniel Pantaleo, who was seen on a video using a chokehold, prohibited by the New York Police Department, to subdue Mr. Garner.  Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch recently replaced the New York team of federal agents and lawyers investigating the case, who were leaning against filing charges against the officers involved, a move that struck some as political.  On Tuesday night as defeat set in, Ms. Carr began writing a letter to Ms. Lynch pleading with her to quickly decide how to proceed before Mr. Trump takes office.  “Please hear my cry, don’t allow my son’s words and our tears to be in vain,” Ms. Carr wrote before sending it off Friday morning. “I’ve been living in a nightmare and crying for over two years and I’m ready to awake to peace.”  In an interview, Ms. Carr added that she felt new pressure to get the case resolved. “I know my son’s case is on the line, and if it goes past Obama’s administration, we are not going to get any justice,” she said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  William Bateman, 52, who voted for Mr. Trump and works as an operations manager in the Dallas-Fort Worth area, sees things differently. He felt that the Justice Department, under Mr. Obama’s direction, “politicized everything,” and that the president was unfair to the police by “blaming them before they went to trial.”  He also said he believed a constant theme of Mr. Obama’s tenure was a sentiment of exclusion, beginning when the president weighed in on the 2012 shooting death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin by a neighborhood watch volunteer in Sanford, Fla. “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon,” Mr. Obama said then.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It was like he was defending the black community, the Muslim community, the Hispanic community,” Mr. Bateman said this week. “But not the white community.”  The feeling that Mr. Obama was taking sides reverberated around the country and was part of the reason the National Fraternal Order of Police endorsed Mr. Trump, said Jim Pasco, its executive director. Many saw parallels between Mr. Trump’s law-and-order pledge and Richard M. Nixon’s 1968 campaign that became a reaction to the national strife over the Vietnam War, the Voting Rights Act, the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, and widespread rioting.  “The atmosphere has gotten harder for police officers because there is a lot of second-guessing by people with a lack of insight into their jobs and a lack of expertise on what constitutes appropriate policing techniques in given situations,” Mr. Pasco said, adding that officers hoped that Mr. Trump would change the nation’s view of policing.  But if the election of Mr. Trump was a counterprotest against Black Lives Matter, there were no signs that protest leaders planned to turn down the volume. Activists like Charlene Carruthers, the national director of Black Youth Project 100, said this week that they were reeling from Mr. Trump’s election and were preparing to strongly oppose his policies.  “We are now facing a presidential administration that not only does not value black people’s lives,” Ms. Carruthers said, “but will promote and support policies that will actively make our lives worse and kill more people.”
Donald Trump’s Career Path  From New York real estate to casinos to reality television, Mr. Trump’s career has kept him in the spotlight for years.
Donald Trump’s Career Path  From New York real estate to casinos to reality television, Mr. Trump’s career has kept him in the spotlight for years.
Donald Trump’s Career Path  From New York real estate to casinos to reality television, Mr. Trump’s career has kept him in the spotlight for years.
Donald Trump’s Career Path  From New York real estate to casinos to reality television, Mr. Trump’s career has kept him in the spotlight for years.
Donald Trump’s Career Path  From New York real estate to casinos to reality television, Mr. Trump’s career has kept him in the spotlight for years.
[Female Clinton Supporters Are Left Feeling Gutted]  In interviews here in the Lehigh Valley — a bellwether region in a swing state that helped elect Mr. Trump — and around the country, female supporters said theirs was a vote for Mr. Trump and not against Hillary Clinton. America was on the wrong track, the women said, and Mr. Trump alone could fix it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They are women who want their daughters to grow up and run businesses — and who run businesses themselves. Many said they were eager for a woman as president. Were they offended by Mr. Trump’s vile comments about women, captured on tape? Absolutely. Did they believe the women who came forward and said Mr. Trump had groped them? Not necessarily. Did any of it stop them from voting for him? No.  Where female opponents took to Twitter with #NotOkay, branding Mr. Trump a misogynist and worse, his female supporters saw “a good man and a good father,” said Mary Barket, the head of the Pennsylvania Federation of Republican Women, who knows Ms. Biro from church and helped her get involved in the Trump campaign.  Ms. Biro, who said she was “a quiet, reserved person,” had never knocked on doors or worked in politics before. But she spent one day each weekend since August canvassing for Mr. Trump.  Photo  Where those who voted against Mr. Trump saw someone who bankrupted businesses and ducked paying taxes, these women said they saw a man who built a real estate empire and simply followed the law. They saw a man who had raised and promoted a beautiful and successful daughter, Ivanka, and who let a smart and accomplished Washington strategist, Kellyanne Conway, manage his presidential campaign.  In short, they embraced Mr. Trump’s sales pitch for himself.  “I think that women see the big picture — women are smart,” Mrs. Gauta said. “The fact that he said something crude,” she said “is not going to change my mind about the good he can do for our country.  “Did I like that, no,” she went on. “But do I think he can do a better job than Hillary? Absolutely. I think he has got the best interests of this country at heart. He’s got a beautiful family; he wants to leave a nice country — the great country he was raised in — for his kids. And I think he said the only way I’m going to get that done is by being president myself.”  She took her sons, 14 and 16, to a Trump rally, and said she “was even more impressed by him in person than on TV.” But as to his sometimes foul mouth, “If my boys ever said anything like that, I’d put them over my knee and spank them.’’  In Chicago, Nicole Been, 22, a Roman Catholic who attends DePaul University, is deeply opposed to abortion and the “hookup culture.” She complained that other students branded her a racist and a bigot for supporting Mr. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Philadelphia, Daphne Goggins, 53, an African-American community activist and ardent Republican, always knew she would vote for Mr. Trump. She said she believed decades of Democratic efforts had done little for black people. When Mr. Trump invited her to a minority outreach meeting, she told him tearfully that “for the first time in my life, I feel like my vote is going to count.” (Only 4 percent of black women, exit polls show, supported Mr. Trump, while 26 percent of Latinas did.)  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  For the women interviewed, as for male Trump backers, the economy was of utmost concern. Mrs. Gauta and her husband are tired of paying $1,800 a month in health care premiums, with a $12,000 annual deductible. Ms. Lincoln, the retired college administrator, now works at her husband’s auto body shop in Old Town, Me., to help pay the bills.  Ms. Ostendorf, the graphics producer in Los Angeles, watched her father’s million-dollar business implode in the economic crash of 2008. He picked up work doing maintenance for the Y.M.C.A.  “I’ve seen America fall down,” she said, “and a big part of Trump that appealed to me was his business plan.”  Photo  And they said they are troubled, as well, by an America that seems to have embraced multiculturalism and political correctness without question. They said they did not understand the Black Lives Matter movement, wondered why Democrats seemed so fixated on transgender access to bathrooms and tended to be enraged at the way veterans are treated and violence directed at the police.  They are concerned about immigration and the threat of terrorism.  Bobbye Horton, 67, of Grand Junction, Colo., who is Hispanic, approved of Mr. Trump’s plan to build a wall with Mexico. On Wednesday she wore a “Viva Trump” T-shirt. Immigrants, she said, needed to use legal channels or stay out. “He got at the heart of America.”  Research suggests Americans in both parties long ago became open to a female president. By 1999, the Gallup poll found that 92 percent of Americans said they would vote for a woman. When Gallup first asked that question, in 1937, the figure was 33 percent.  “People no longer hear, ‘Do you want a woman to be president?’” Ms. Conway said in an interview in February, before she became Mr. Trump’s campaign manager. “They hear, ‘Do you want that woman?’”  This held true in many conversations with Mr. Trump’s female supporters. Many said they simply avoided talking about voting for him with Democratic female friends, for fear it would damage their sisterly bonds. (Ms. Biro never speaks of politics at yoga or at work.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “When I told them that I was supporting Trump, they were, like, shocked, oh my gosh, ‘there is no way I could support him,’” Ms. Biro said of her friends. “But I was like, ‘Everybody has their thing.’”  Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster, said the party had expected “a surge of women” to support Mrs. Clinton, but that did not happen. While Mrs. Clinton did better with women in almost every demographic group, Ms. Lake said, “Trump won very solidly the white women’s vote, and we know that was fed by white, blue-collar women.”  Ms. Biro comes close to fitting that mold; although she considers herself middle class, she did not go to college. And Nazareth, a middle-class community in Northampton County, is the kind of community where Mr. Trump did well.  Yet sitting in the kitchen of her tidy Cape Cod-style home here, with the Trump-Pence signs still stuck in the front yard and a poster that speaks of peace as a path to enlightenment on the living room wall, Ms. Biro expressed the same hopes and fears for the country that many of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters now have.  “Hopefully he’s going to try to unite people,” she said of the president-elect. “We have to try to help people heal, so people can learn to trust, and have faith that things are going to be O.K.”
In Wisconsin, Mr. Johnson, who had been trailing badly against former Senator Russ Feingold, was aided by an enormous cash infusion from outside groups.  Photo  Democrats appear to have picked up two seats, enough to render the Senate fiercely and narrowly divided but leaving them in the minority. Democrats gained one seat in Illinois with Representative Tammy Duckworth defeating Senator Mark S. Kirk, a Republican. In New Hampshire, Gov. Maggie Hassan claimed victory on Wednesday but with a lead of fewer than 700 votes over Kelly Ayotte, the Republican senator, that contest is far from conclusion.  And in Nevada, Catherine Cortez Masto defeated Representative Joe Heck, retaining the seat for Democrats held by Senator Harry Reid, who is retiring. But they lost their chances at a gain when Evan Bayh, who had served two terms each as governor and senator in the state, lost to Representative Todd Young.  Many races narrowed substantially in the closing weeks, and analysts in both parties predicted that the Senate would be closely divided no matter which party took control.  From the beginning of the election cycle, Republicans were on the defensive in the Senate, where they had far more competitive seats in play than the Democrats. In the House, gerrymandering and the Republicans’ largest majority since the 1930s seemed sure to keep the chamber in their control.  In the Senate, seven incumbent Republicans elected in the Tea Party wave of 2010 seemed particularly vulnerable, but the party had built up something of a buffer with big wins in 2014 that gave it a four-seat majority.  Republicans also benefited from the efforts of Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, who tried to make sure that incumbents did not face the kind of challenges from the right that had bedeviled the party since 2010.  Mr. Toomey, Mr. Burr and Senator and Charles E. Grassley of Iowa all avoided seriously contested primaries, allowing many of them to run as seasoned center-right candidates as opposed to hard-line conservatives. Mr. Rubio also avoided a messy intraparty fight for his seat once he entered the race after his failed shot at the White House.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Republicans’ fear of Mr. Trump’s presidential bid lingered before the votes were tallied. Most starkly, Mr. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, waited until the last possible moment to say that he voted for the Republican nominee after weeks of evading the question.  But in the end, some candidates who rejected Mr. Trump prevailed, others who abandoned him lost and those who tried to avoid the question of his candidacy did fine. Mr. Portman, who started off as a provisional underdog, began an early attack on his opponent, Ted Strickland, the former Ohio governor, over job losses during Mr. Strickland’s tenure. His no-stone-unturned campaign — which even included radio ads in Ukrainian — and a big volunteer network helped him compensate for a less robust turnout operation from the top of the ticket.  The Republican Party’s task appeared to get infinitely more difficult when its voters chose Mr. Trump to head the ticket. Suddenly, the divisiveness was coming not from challengers to the incumbents but from the man running for president who railed against Washington politicians, including many of those seeking re-election.  Most Senate candidates initially remained mum about Mr. Trump’s candidacy, but they were forced, often awkwardly, to react to his many contentious statements.  Mr. McCain and Ms. Ayotte eventually broke with their party’s nominee, saying they could not support his quest for the White House. But Mr. McCain did so not after Mr. Trump insulted him personally or after Mr. Trump offended a Gold Star family, but only when Mr. McCain had obtained a comfortable lead. Ms. Ayotte rejected Mr. Trump after various tortured moments, which cost her support. Mr. Portman stuck to his position of supporting Mr. Trump while largely distancing himself from his remarks.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In Nevada, Mr. Heck, seeking the seat vacated by Mr. Reid, the Democratic leader, renounced Mr. Trump, only to incur a fierce backlash from Trump supporters. Ms. Cortez Masto, who had Mr. Reid’s strong backing, will become the nation’s first Latina senator.  Some themes of the election transcended partisanship. Mr. Blunt, Republican of Missouri, and Mr. Bayh were hit repeatedly for their ties to lobbyists. Mr. Bayh, who began his race with a double-digit lead in polls over Mr. Young, was swamped by negative ads paid for by outside political groups that painted him as out of touch with his state and too in touch with Washington’s insider culture.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The negative tenor of Mr. Trump’s campaign clearly had a significant impact in states where Democratic Party leaders failed to recruit high-wattage candidates for some winnable seats. Still, those candidates ran highly competitive races and in some cases were poised for victory.  Their Pennsylvania recruit, Katie McGinty, held a midlevel position in Bill Clinton’s White House but no major elective office. In North Carolina, former Senator Kay Hagan passed on a comeback, and Democrats settled on Deborah Ross, a little-known lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union.  In Florida, Mr. Murphy was seen as a credible opponent against what started as a disorganized field of Republicans hoping to succeed Mr. Rubio. But once the incumbent jumped back in, Mr. Murphy quickly took criticism for funding his campaign with the help of his wealthy father and for padding his résumé. Democrats, disappointed with his campaign, put their resources elsewhere.  The nation’s Senate races ended in a record level of cash. “Super PACs” and other outside groups spent more than $600 million on behalf of candidates this year, the bulk of it in roughly half a dozen competitive races, according to the Federal Election Commission.  The total surpasses every biennial upward progression of outside money in races since the 2010 Supreme Court decision that determined that the government was prohibited from restricting independent expenditure by groups that can raise unlimited money in political campaigns.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The election of Donald J. Trump means that Justice Antonin Scalia’s seat, vacant since he died in February, will almost certainly be filled by a conservative nominee. Back to full strength, the court will again tilt right, as it has for decades.  And with the court’s two senior liberal members fairly old, that may be only the start. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is 83, and Justice Stephen G. Breyer is 78.  Mr. Trump’s surprising triumph vindicates Republican senators, who refused to act on President Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland, saying the choice of a new Supreme Court justice should belong to the next president. It now belongs to Mr. Trump.  “Senate Republicans’ strategy of not even considering Garland, of letting the American people decide who gets to fill Scalia’s seat, worked,” said Ilya Shapiro, a lawyer with the Cato Institute, a libertarian group. “Not only that, but it didn’t at all hurt vulnerable senators running for re-election.”  But some liberals said they hoped that even a Supreme Court dominated by conservative justices, including ones on Mr. Trump’s list of 21 possible nominees vetted by conservative legal groups, could serve as a restraint on Mr. Trump’s ambitions.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Given that many of the conservatives on his list are more in the traditional conservative mold than Trump himself, they might not simply write him a blank check when it comes to actions and policies that threaten constitutional structure,” said Elizabeth Wydra, the president of the Constitutional Accountability Center. “As is the case during every administration of either party, the court will inevitably be asked to step in and serve the judicial branch’s role as a check on the political branches.”  In the short term, the court led by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. is poised to return to the status quo: closely divided, leaning right, with the crucial vote belonging to Justice Anthony M. Kennedy. “He may have been the biggest winner last night,” Mr. Shapiro said of Justice Kennedy.  Mr. Trump’s election represents a lost opportunity for liberals, and they are fearful of what comes next at the Supreme Court.  “On the brink of having the first liberal-leaning Supreme Court in decades, the judicial left has now been banished to the wilderness for perhaps decades more,” said Barry Friedman, a law professor at New York University. “It is difficult seeing a path to anything other than a yet more conservative court for the imaginable future.”  The balance of power at the Supreme Court could truly shift if there is a second vacancy while Mr. Trump is president. That appears entirely possible.  Justice Ginsburg, who was harshly critical of Mr. Trump and seemed to predict a victory for Hillary Clinton, will face second-guessing over her decision to stay on the court rather than let Mr. Obama try to appoint her successor.  Other retirements are possible, too. Justice Kennedy, the member of the court at its ideological center, is 80.  “In the worst case, we end up with a 7-2 conservative court, and a relatively young one at that,” Professor Friedman said. “This could be a typhoon for the Supreme Court. An already very conservative jurisprudence will deepen and may broaden, encompassing areas that had long been resistant, such as abortion rights.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For now, abortion rights appear secure. In June, the court struck down a restrictive Texas abortion law by a 5-to-3 vote, with Justice Kennedy joining the court’s four-member liberal wing. A new justice opposed to abortion rights would tighten that tally but not tip it.  Similarly, affirmative action seems safe in the short term. In June, the court upheld a race-conscious admissions program at the University of Texas by a 4-to-3 vote. Justice Elena Kagan was recused but would almost certainly have voted with the majority, making the effective vote 5 to 3. Here again, a single Trump appointment would not change things.  But a second Trump appointment is another matter, said Lee Epstein, a law professor and political scientist at Washington University in St. Louis. “We could see dramatic legal change,” she said, “with the recent affirmative action and abortion cases on the chopping block.”  Other areas of the law could be subject to faster change after a single Trump appointment. A threat to public-sector unions that ended in a deadlock in March, for instance, could soon reach the court again. This time, the challengers are likely to gain a fifth vote.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The last term’s other major deadlock, over Mr. Obama’s plan to spare millions of unauthorized immigrants from deportation and allow them to work legally in the United States, will almost certainly be resolved without court intervention; Mr. Trump has vowed to take a different path on immigration.  He is also likely to use his executive authority to undo the Obama administration’s approach to climate change, transgender rights and clashes between religious beliefs and contraception coverage, again effectively pulling the plug on pending challenges in the courts.  The Supreme Court decides about 70 cases a year, reviewing only a tiny fraction of the hundreds of thousands of lawsuits and prosecutions filed in federal courts. The lower federal courts are for now dominated by Democratic appointees, and the vast majority of their decisions escape Supreme Court review. In the short term, that leaves plenty of room for significant and lasting liberal victories in the lower federal courts.  But the compositions of those courts will start to change, too, as Mr. Trump appoints judges to them. If his list of potential Supreme Court nominees is any guide, his lower-court appointments will also pull the law to the right.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In the meantime, the replacement of Justice Scalia with another conservative would return the Supreme Court to a familiar dynamic, said Ms. Wydra of the Constitutional Accountability Center.  “That means conservative legal activists will once again be able to attempt aggressive changes that push the law even further to the right,” she said, “but there will still be the potential for more progressive rulings like the marriage equality and abortion rulings we saw from the court even with Scalia.”  Almost all of the candidates on Mr. Trump’s list of potential nominees are sitting judges, and several served as law clerks to conservative Supreme Court justices. Many have judicial track records hostile to federal power, abortion rights and same-sex marriage.  By training and temperament, judges move more slowly than politicians, and they have different values.  “An open question is what happens when Trump realizes that the sorts of judges he’s been advised to appoint would rule against him on various matters,” said Mr. Shapiro of the Cato Institute.
More than any of his potential rivals for the White House, Mr. Walker, 47, is a product of a loose network of conservative donors, think tanks and talk radio hosts who have spent years preparing the road for a politician who could successfully present their arguments for small government to a broader constituency.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Walker has embraced those goals in Wisconsin, and the promise of his fledgling presidential campaign is to do the same in Washington. The little-known governor-elect honored in Milwaukee has become something of a conservative hero, backed by wealthy donors like Charles G. and David H. Koch and revered as a leader brave enough to face down unions and their liberal supporters.  At his side during his rapid rise was Mr. Grebe, who provided crucial validation for Mr. Walker among Wisconsin Republicans skeptical that a college dropout turned career politician would become a successful and consequential governor.  “At the risk of being immodest, I probably lent some credibility to his campaign early on,” Mr. Grebe, 74, said in a recent interview.  Video  Many Democrats and union leaders would call that an understatement.  “Scott Walker didn’t have the stature, influence or money to become governor on his own or to end collective bargaining on his own,” said Phil Neuenfeldt, president of the Wisconsin A.F.L.-C.I.O. “All of that flowed from Mike Grebe, the Bradley Foundation and a network of influential conservatives, including the Kochs.”  Mr. Neuenfeldt added: “He wouldn’t be running for president without these people. He would be their guy in Washington.”  But the reasons for Mr. Walker’s success are more complex. In the Wisconsin Legislature and as Milwaukee County executive, he always liked going to extremes and basking in his own brand of boldness. What he needed, as he climbed the political ladder, was the money and endorsements that Mr. Grebe and his conservative allies brought. As for the fight against the unions, it went far better than Mr. Walker, Mr. Grebe or anyone else could have expected, as weeks of huge protests drew a national news spotlight that let Mr. Walker shine.  “It made Scott Walker a national candidate,” said Tommy G. Thompson, a Republican who was governor of Wisconsin from 1987 to 2001. “It showed that he could stand up to pressure. And he didn’t back down. And people want that in a leader.”  Mr. Walker declined to comment on his conservative supporters, but Rick Wiley, executive director of Our American Revival, the governor’s political committee, cited his record of changing the state government in Wisconsin as an example of his leadership. “Tough times called for big, bold solutions, and Scott Walker thought outside the box,” Mr. Wiley said. “His reforms transformed Wisconsin for future generations, because that’s what leaders do.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  An Ally of Unions’ Foes  Unions were the bane of Wisconsin conservatives long before Mr. Walker first entered office in 1993 as a state assemblyman. After Wisconsin took the landmark step in 1959 of allowing collective bargaining for public employees, state spending grew steadily to help cover negotiated salaries and generous benefits, and so did the criticism from retailers, manufacturers and bankers.  “Businesspeople talked about trying to end collective bargaining for years, but it always seemed so uphill a battle,” said James Buchen, who oversaw government affairs for a powerful industry group, Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce, when Mr. Walker became governor.  Conservatives focused instead on pushing for a welfare overhaul and private school vouchers, with particular help coming from the Bradley Foundation, which spent millions of dollars on think tank reports and advocacy groups championing both policies. The foundation — named after brothers, Lynde and Harry Bradley, who were well-known Wisconsin industrialists — has more than $800 million in assets. It supports arts, education and health organizations in Wisconsin as well as, increasingly, the goals of American conservatism.  Photo  That focus has intensified under Mr. Grebe, a West Point graduate and Vietnam veteran who led the law firm Foley & Lardner before taking over the foundation in 2002. Mr. Grebe was always drawn to the national stage: He was general counsel of the Republican National Committee and a Wisconsin power broker for presidential candidates, including as state chairman for Ronald Reagan’s re-election campaign in 1984.  Mr. Grebe spotted Scott Walker when Mr. Walker, who considers Reagan his political role model, was a Marquette University student volunteering at events for Reagan or the Republican Party of Wisconsin. Mr. Grebe recalled no particular impressions of Mr. Walker from those encounters, but Mr. Walker got his attention years later as a candidate for Milwaukee County executive.  Mr. Grebe, who donated $1,000 to Mr. Walker’s executive campaign and became a member of his transition team, said he had come to believe that Mr. Walker was determined to bring change to the county in spite of “a highly charged partisan relationship with the Democratic-led county board.”  “If all he was was a bulwark to an entrenched Democratic majority, I don’t think he would be interested in any job,” Mr. Grebe said. “He’s really interested in change, in doing bold things.”  So were others. Americans for Prosperity, the group financed by the Kochs, started a Wisconsin chapter led by a veteran Republican operative there, Mark Block, who tapped into voters’ anger at Gov. James E. Doyle, a Democrat, and his tax and spending increases. From 2006 to 2010, the chapter grew to 100,000 members from 250 and drew huge crowds for meetings that eventually evolved into Tea Party events.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Block and his group’s national president, Tim Phillips, got to know Mr. Walker when he was county executive; he joined them during one of their “Ending Earmarks Express” bus tours, and they kept a close eye on him.  “We thought here’s this young, newer, local leader who is not nibbling around the edges but really getting serious about issues, especially trying to take on the unions on spending and pension issues,” Mr. Phillips said.  The Bradley Foundation gave to Americans for Prosperity but was more integral to financing two think tanks that railed against Mr. Doyle and generated policy ideas and talking points that were picked up by Wisconsin’s powerful bench of right-wing talk radio hosts. In 2009, the foundation gave a $1 million grant to one of the think tanks, the Wisconsin Policy Research Institute, to recommend policy ideas for the next governor. It also backed the MacIver Institute, providing one-third of its budget.  Both think tanks proposed dozens of small-government policies, and at the top of their lists was curbing the power of the public employee unions.  “Some people in the Walker campaign were scratching their heads about how to deal with union health and pension costs, and we supplied the ideas,” said James R. Klauser, who was chairman of the Wisconsin Policy Research Institute at the time. “Mike Grebe wanted to see union reform, but I don’t think he got into the details. But the issue was a good match with Walker himself: He’s very conservative, and he takes pride in trying big things.”  A Long-Shot Fight  By the time Mr. Walker ran for governor in 2010, he was clashing regularly with unions, calling for cost savings through shorter hours, layoffs, privatization, even an imagined disassembling of the very government he ran.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Never did we ever have a civil moment with that man,” said David Eisner, a local official for the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, a big public workers union.  The approach played well in the state’s interwoven universe of conservative talk radio, where Mr. Walker became a favorite guest of hosts like Charlie Sykes of WTMJ in Milwaukee. Mr. Sykes, whose wife is director of community programs at the Bradley Foundation, has a daily radio show and a television program and edits Wisconsin Interest, a magazine from the Wisconsin Policy Research Institute.  During the governor’s race, Mr. Walker sometimes spoke of “haves and have-nots,” referring to public-sector workers and those in private business. He did not announce specific plans to cut bargaining rights, and some, like Mr. Grebe, said they had never heard him explicitly address ending collective bargaining. Yet the two men had similar views about unions, Mr. Grebe said, and Mr. Walker was determined to get union members to pay more for their pension and health care benefits.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  If Mr. Walker had not been on the Kochs’ radar before, he was now. The political action committee for their energy conglomerate, Koch Industries, donated $43,000 to Mr. Walker’s 2010 bid, while Americans for Prosperity focused on organizing for legislative races.  The result was that for the first time in about a decade, Wisconsin found itself with a Republican governor and a Republican-led Assembly and Senate.  Photo  Three weeks later, the MacIver Institute posted an opinion column that made the first public case for repealing collective bargaining to take back control of pay and benefits for public employees. MacIver’s leaders said they had not coordinated the idea with Mr. Walker or the Bradley Foundation — it just seemed obvious that everyone was moving toward a “big and bold” solution, as Mr. Walker kept putting it.  Still, MacIver’s leaders were not sure it would go anywhere.  “I didn’t think there would be the votes” in the Legislature, said Brett Healy, president of MacIver. “I think it’s safe to say Capitol insiders would have initially bet the house that Governor Walker would’ve had no shot at passing collective bargaining reform.”  But Mr. Walker announced a drive to do just that in February 2011, six weeks into his governorship, proposing a bill that became known as Act 10. He portrayed it as a simple antidote to a looming fiscal hole for the state, saying, “I’m just trying to balance my budget.”  Within days, the State Capitol in Madison was crammed with enraged union members and supporters. When the issue reached the Senate, the Democratic minority secretly fled the state, a gambit aimed at denying Republicans the quorum needed to call a vote on any bill involving the appropriation of funds.  As the chaos mounted, at least a few Republicans quietly urged Mr. Walker to tone down his proposal. “There were prominent people who said, ‘You need to get out of this,’ ” Mr. Sykes, the WTMJ host, recalled.  Yet an entirely different dynamic was emerging, too. With cable news satellite trucks broadcasting a constant loop of reports from Madison, the standoff captured the attention of conservatives outside Wisconsin who had never heard of Mr. Walker. The images, of Democrats who had fled town and screaming protesters camped out all over the elegant Capitol, galvanized Republicans.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On talk radio, hosts spoke of threats to Republican leaders and their families, including Mr. Walker, who could hear chants from his desk even when his office door was shut: “Come out, come out, wherever you are!”  Americans for Prosperity put up television ads supporting Act 10 and organized a “Stand With Walker” bus tour of Wisconsin. The Wisconsin Club for Growth, another conservative group, took to the airwaves with ads and raised money from Wisconsin and beyond.  Electoral Vindication  For Mr. Walker’s conservative patrons, the war against the unions showed he was willing to take huge political risks for a goal other Republicans might have regarded as too extreme.  “I knew Act 10 was going to be quite divisive and controversial, but it was a very good idea, a good set of policy moves,” Mr. Grebe said.  He said all the credit should go to the man in office. “There’s this attempt to portray me as some kind of Svengali in my relationship” with Mr. Walker, he said, “and that’s simply not the case.”  After Act 10 passed, Mr. Walker’s opponents used a provision in the State Constitution to schedule a recall election. No governor in the United States had ever won a recall election, but by that point, Mr. Walker had a national network of conservative donors and groups behind him. Almost 300,000 people donated to his recall campaign, which raised about $37 million, two-thirds of it from outside Wisconsin.  But some of his support came from familiar sources: Mr. Grebe was again the chairman of his campaign. Diane Hendricks, a Wisconsin businesswoman who is on the board of the Bradley Foundation, contributed $500,000 alone. And Americans for Prosperity spent $3.7 million on ads and mailings supporting Mr. Walker’s policies.  Mr. Walker won the recall with 53 percent of the vote. In 2014, he was elected again: his third win in four years in a state that has not voted Republican in a presidential election since 1984.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Soon, Mr. Walker began talking with Mr. Grebe and other advisers about the White House. As he started making visits over the winter to national conservative conferences, as well as early nominating states like Iowa and New Hampshire, he made Act 10 a centerpiece of his stump speech.  David Koch offered an opinion at a recent private gathering that Mr. Walker was the favorite for the Republican nomination. And Mr. Walker’s old allies are hungry once more for a leader who will go to extremes, this time as president.  Last week, Mr. Grebe and the board of the Bradley Foundation gathered again, this time at the Kennedy Center in Washington. George F. Will, the conservative columnist and a foundation board member, served as M.C., warming up the crowd by joking that, just as Republicans promised “a chicken for every pot” during Herbert Hoover’s 1928 presidential bid, Hillary Rodham Clinton would deliver a private email server to every home.  “Strong American leadership will return,” said Jack Keane, a retired general and a recipient that night of a $250,000 Bradley Prize for innovative achievement. “We are one leader away.”  General Keane did not put a name to that leader. But Mr. Grebe surely had his friend in mind; he had said by phone earlier that Mr. Walker would make “a very good president” and had a “decent chance to get the nomination.”  But in his speech, Mr. Grebe did not mention Mr. Walker, just the conservative forces that wanted big, bold change. “In recent years at the Bradley Foundation, we’ve placed even greater emphasis on collaboration with other like-minded foundations and donors,” Mr. Grebe said in a video presentation as symphonic music soared in a crescendo. “We believe that through that collaboration, together we can help change the world.”
In his concession speech in Milwaukee, Mr. Barrett said: “We are a state that has been deeply divided. It is up to all of us — our side and their side — to listen, to listen to each other.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The result raised broader questions about the strength of labor groups, who had called hundreds of thousands of voters and knocked on thousands of doors. The outcome also seemed likely to embolden leaders in other states who have considered limits to unions as a way to solve budget problems, but had watched the backlash against Mr. Walker with worry.  Some Republicans said they considered Mr. Walker’s victory one indication that Wisconsin, which President Obama won easily in 2008 and which Democrats have carried in every presidential election since 1988, may be worth battling for this time.  “Obviously, Scott Walker winning tonight means that the Republicans are here for real,” said Reince Priebus, chairman of the Republican National Committee. “Conservatives are here for real.” Mr. Priebus was attending Mr. Walker’s victory party at the Waukesha County Exposition Center, where “We Stand With Walker” signs were all around.  But even with the Republican victory on Tuesday, it remained an open question whether Mitt Romney, the party’s presidential nominee, can assume the momentum of Mr. Walker’s campaign. In exit polling of voters, 18 percent of Walker supporters said they favored Mr. Obama, and the president led in a matchup against Mr. Romney. Voters in the exit surveys also said they saw Mr. Obama as better equipped to improve the economy and help the middle class.  Republicans prevailed in at least four recall elections on Tuesday for other offices, including a race for lieutenant governor, which the incumbent, Rebecca Kleefisch, won. Scott Fitzgerald, the State Senate’s majority leader, who had ushered much of Mr. Walker’s agenda through the Legislature, also survived. Early Wednesday, unofficial returns showed a Democrat ahead by fewer than 800 votes in a State Senate race in Racine, and Democrats were claiming narrow control of the chamber, though a recount also appeared possible.  Mr. Walker, who raised millions of dollars from conservative donors outside the state, had a strong financial advantage, in part because a quirk in state law allowed him months of unlimited fund-raising, from the time the recall challenge was mounted to when the election was officially called. As of late last month, about $45.6 million had been spent on behalf of Mr. Walker, compared with about $17.9 million for Mr. Barrett, according to data from the Wisconsin Democracy Campaign, a nonpartisan group that tracks spending.  “What it shows is the peril of corporate dollars in an election and the dangers of Citizens United,” said Dennis Van Roekel, president of the National Education Association, a school workers’ union, referring to the 2010 Supreme Court decision that barred the federal government from restricting political expenditures from corporations, unions and other groups.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Voters went to the polls in droves — more than 2.5 million votes were cast — and some polling places needed extra ballots brought in as long lines of people waited. One polling location was so swamped, state officials said, that it found itself using photocopied ballots, which later had to be hand-counted. The final flurry of television advertising — with Mr. Walker outspending Mr. Barrett seven to one — seemed to have little impact on the outcome. Nearly 9 in 10 people said they had made up their minds before May, according to exit poll interviews.  The recall race carried implications well beyond Wisconsin, particularly in the escalating fight between wealthy conservative donors and labor unions. Many Republican contributors from across the country who have invested millions in the presidential race also sent checks to Mr. Walker, hoping to inflict deep wounds on organized labor, a key constituency for Democrats.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The outcome was also being closely monitored in Boston by Mr. Romney’s campaign and in Chicago at Mr. Obama’s re-election headquarters for a signal of how the electorate is viewing the big issues in the race for the White House. The president kept his distance from Wisconsin, to the dismay of many Democrats in the state, in an effort to avoid alienating independent voters he hopes to win over in the fall.  A snapshot of the Wisconsin electorate, gleaned through surveys with voters as they left the polls, found that a majority of men had supported Mr. Walker, while most women had voted for Mr. Barrett. Almost a fifth of the electorate was 65 or older, with only about one in 10 voters of college age. The recall race unfolded against a backdrop of economic uncertainty, with only 2 in 10 voters saying their family’s finances have improved in the two years since Mr. Walker was elected. About a third said their financial situation had grown worse, and more than 4 in 10 said their finances had stayed the same.  The political war in Wisconsin began in February 2011 when Governor Walker, only weeks into his first term, announced that he needed to cut benefits and collective bargaining rights for most public workers as a way to solve an expected state budget deficit of $3.6 billion.  Tens of thousands of union supporters and Democrats protested in Madison, the capital, and the State Senate’s Democrats — who were a minority in the chamber but had enough members to prevent a quorum — went into hiding in hotels and houses in Illinois to try, unsuccessfully, to prevent a vote on the measure.  By January, critics of Mr. Walker delivered more than 900,000 signatures on petitions to recall him, far more than the one-quarter of voters from the last election that state law requires.  The election, which cost local governments as much as $18 million to carry out, has raised another debate over the appropriateness of using a recall vote to remove officials.  “Recall was never meant to be used just because you don’t like the way the other side is governing,” said Jenny Beth Martin, a co-founder of the Tea Party Patriots, which made tens of thousands of calls to voters in recent days in support of Mr. Walker.  Around the nation, numerous efforts have been made over the years to recall governors, but only three, including the push to remove Mr. Walker, met the requirements to place the matter on the ballot. In California, Gov. Gray Davis was removed in 2003, and in North Dakota, Gov. Lynn Frazier was recalled in 1921.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Trent Lott, the former Republican senator from Mississippi, had gleefully flown back from Florida, where he had been working for the campaign of Donald J. Trump. Now a powerful lobbyist, his phone had been buzzing nonstop and he was busy helping to organize a briefing Thursday morning for dozens of corporate clients.  He was not alone. The stunning surprise of the election, and the political chaos it created, is a boon for Washington’s lobbying corridor known as K Street.  Corporate America is both excited and anxious about the prospect of Mr. Trump’s presidency, seeing great opportunity to shape the agenda after an extended period of frustration over gridlock in Congress.  With Republicans poised to control both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, Mr. Lott said he had not seen such a chance to help clients since he left the Senate in 2007 — whether by making changes to the federal tax code for Amazon or increasing military spending on new ships for Huntington Ingalls Industries.  “Trump has pledged to change things in Washington — about draining the swamp,” said Mr. Lott, who now works at Squire Patton Boggs, a law and lobbying firm. “He is going to need some people to help guide him through the swamp — how do you get in and how you get out? We are prepared to help do that.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Across Washington, lobbyists and trade association executives were busy reviewing their priorities, which include repealing financial regulations instituted during the Obama administration, pushing for cuts in corporate taxes, overhauling President Obama’s signature health care plan and spending billions on roads, bridges and other infrastructure.  “On these significant issues, now that you have one party controlling the executive branch and the legislature, it is more likely they will be addressed,” said Marc S. Lampkin, managing partner of the lobbying firm Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck, whose roster of more than 135 clients includes the drug maker AbbVie and the insurance company Zurich Financial Services.  Photo  Mr. Lampkin, a former Republican aide on Capitol Hill, had fielded so many phone calls on Wednesday from his clients that his voice had turned raspy with fatigue. “There is a lot of pent-up demand to break the gridlock in Washington,” he said.  Prominent Washington lobbyists also said that Mr. Trump would arrive in the capital with a much smaller contingent of veteran policy advisers than Hillary Clinton would have brought — and they see that relative inexperience as an opening. So they are prepared to draft legislation and regulations to quietly pass to allies on Capitol Hill and in the White House.  It is an opportunity that comes after a period of decline in lobbying revenues for many major firms. Total lobbying spending in Washington, after climbing consistently for nearly two decades began to dip in 2011, as congressional action slowed with divided government.  “Trump’s management style and policy approach to the campaign implies he is going to set big broad ‘beautiful’ direction and the elected lawmakers will take significant cuts at trying to flesh it out and reflect his will,” said Bruce P. Mehlman, the founder of Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, which has more than 70 clients ranging from Adobe, the software company, to Walmart.  Lobbyists will also be leveraging their relationships. Mr. Lott, for example, noted his longstanding friendship with Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, whose name has been mentioned as a possible secretary of defense, as well as his former aides like Rick Dearborn, a senior policy adviser to Mr. Trump, and David Hoppe, the chief of staff to Speaker Paul D. Ryan.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “There are going to be a lot of companies and people looking for guidance in how to deal with the legislative and executive branch,” Mr. Lott said. “I am looking forward to it.”  Republicans have pledged, if necessary, to repeal much of the Affordable Care Act or to pass changes in tax code using a process known as reconciliation that requires only a simple majority and not the 60 votes typically required for contentious matters, making the pitch for lobbyists somewhat easier.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Democrats will be needed for many measures, particularly in the Senate, which is why Steve Elmendorf, a Democratic lobbyist, said he was not worried about potential losses of clients.  Photo  “It is never good when you don’t control the administration or either body of Congress,” he said, having just returned from New York, where he went to what he had expected to be Mrs. Clinton’s victory party. “But as long as you have 60-vote thresholds in the Senate, you need members of the other party.”  Bruce Josten, the chief lobbyist at the United States Chamber of Commerce, said he had already been in communication with members of Mr. Trump’s transition team, as the chamber pushes its priorities like securing approval for the Keystone Pipeline, the oil pipeline project blocked by the Obama administration, or reopening more federal lands to oil and gas exploration.  “It is going to be nice to get back on game,” Mr. Josten said, who has spent 22 years running the government relations division at the United States Chamber, the nation’s single biggest spender on lobbying.  The chamber already knows there are certain items Mr. Trump has said he will not support, like the current versions of trade deals with Asia or comprehensive changes in the nation’s immigration laws, which the chamber pushed during Mr. Obama’s tenure. But there are aspects of each of these plans, like increasing the number of visas for highly skilled foreign workers, that Mr. Josten said he expects Mr. Trump to endorse.  Wall Street banks also will have to approach the Trump administration carefully — as Mr. Trump won the election in part by criticizing Mrs. Clinton’s ties to players there. But financial service lobbyists are eager to get moving.  People are rapidly “putting together lists of outdated, ineffective regulations that can be reversed by executive order or, if necessary, legislation,” said Sam K. Geduldig from CGCN Group, which has numerous financial sector clients. “This is their opportunity to undo regulations that have been shackling them.”  The first year of any new administration is traditionally a productive period. The challenge is for the corporate consultants to get their wish list included in the rush of action.  “The plate of issues that will be actively considered will be much larger in 2017 than we have seen in many years,” said Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, who works at BGR Group, a lobbying and public relations firm. “That will help a lot of companies and interests that have been waiting for a long time to be heard.”
“The goal would be to try and get on the same page,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader — who was about as close as the taciturn leader comes to giddy — said as he celebrated the Republican victories at the Capitol.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “We’re going to be an enthusiastic supporter almost all the time,” he said of Mr. Trump. “When we have differences of opinion, I prefer that we work them out in private.”  President Obama’s signature domestic achievement, the Affordable Care Act, was clearly in Republicans’ sights.  “This health care law is collapsing of its own weight,” Speaker Paul D. Ryan said from Wisconsin, adding that Congress had already shown it could get a repeal bill to the president’s desk without any Democratic help. Republicans are widely believed to favor a maneuver used in budgeting that would allow them to undo the law without facing a Democratic filibuster.  Mr. McConnell demurred Wednesday on the process, but said repealing the law, which has provided health care coverage for 20 million people, is “pretty high on our agenda,” adding, “I would be shocked if we didn’t move forward and keep our commitment to the American people.”  Other issues that converge with the new president’s include the confirmation of a conservative Supreme Court justice to fill a vacancy from the death of Antonin Scalia early this year, the reduction of climate and other regulations on businesses and Wall Street, and the diminution of the role of the federal government in an array of policy areas like education.  But other priorities are far from shared. Mr. Trump spent his campaign deriding many of the cornerstone principles of his party: free trade, changes in Social Security and the United States’ posture toward Russia.  “It’s just our constitutional duty to keep the executive branch in check,” Senator-elect Todd Young, Republican of Indiana, said Wednesday.  Mr. Trump also agrees with Republicans on sharp tax cuts for businesses and most American households, especially the wealthiest. The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimated that Mr. Trump’s plan would cut federal revenue by $6.2 trillion over the next decade. Mr. McConnell said Wednesday that Republicans craved comprehensive tax reform, an area where Democrats and Republicans remained deeply divided.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. McConnell, who took a political risk that paid off when he refused to act for eight months on Mr. Obama’s Supreme Court nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland, said he looked forward to advising Mr. Trump on a nominee, but would not say whether Republicans would invoke a rules change to prevent Democrats from filibustering Mr. Trump’s choice.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  However, he hinted that they would avoid doing so, saying that majorities should not “overreach” after a big election win. “I think it’s always a mistake to misread your mandate,” Mr. McConnell said. “I don’t think we should act as if we’re going to be in power forever.”  Mr. Trump has been more impulsive than ideological in his policy goals. He has at times provided scant details, and at others reversed or greatly scaled back his stated goals, such as barring Muslims from entering the country.  Mr. Trump could work with Democrats in some areas, such as repealing carried interest deductions that benefit some investors, an action most Republicans oppose.  And he would like to invest in the nation’s highways, bridges and other infrastructure, a goal Democrats and Republicans share, though the parties do not agree on how to pay for a large-scale public works package.  Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, called Mr. Trump on Wednesday to push for a “robust infrastructure jobs bill.”  On this front, Mr. Trump could conceivably work with Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the presumed incoming Democratic leader, who said he had already talked to Mr. Trump.  “It is time for the country to come together and heal the bitter wounds from the campaign,” Mr. Schumer said in a statement.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The biggest question going into the next Congress will be how Mr. Trump deals with Mr. Ryan, a frequent critic during the campaign. Mr. Trump often returned fire, notably when Mr. Ryan said he could no longer defend Mr. Trump’s more incendiary remarks and disinvited him from a campaign swing in Wisconsin.  But in Mr. Ryan, Mr. Trump has a built-in policy factory with a largely supportive caucus; if he signals his support for Mr. Ryan, if not all of his ideas, the two could probably forge a path forward.  “Nothing unites a political party more than a big win,” said John Feehery, a former top Republican congressional aide. “I expect G.O.P. leaders to work closely with the new Trump administration. They don’t have much of a choice at this juncture.”  Vice President-elect Mike Pence is also expected to be a bridge between the White House and Capitol Hill, and Mr. McConnell said he expected him to take on a role similar to that of former Vice President Dick Cheney, possibly attending weekly lunches with the Republican conference.  Beyond Washington, Tuesday was a good night for Republicans generally.  The party held onto the House with few losses, and made moderate gains at the state level, adding to the broad control it has been building in the states since 2010.  While Democrats had hoped the election would be a chance to start retaking ground in the states and Mr. Obama had directly worked on behalf of more than 150 local Democrats, Republicans gained at least three new governor’s offices on Tuesday. It was unclear whether they would hold on to the governor’s office in North Carolina, where final results were not expected until later this month.  In state legislatures, where Democrats had seen more opportunities, Republicans, who effectively controlled 68 of 99 chambers before Election Day, gained control of at least the Kentucky House and the Iowa Senate.  With votes in some states still being counted on Wednesday, Democrats did take some chambers, but the scope of wins was nowhere near as large as they had hoped; they took control of the New Mexico House and both chambers in Nevada.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The nation’s second-most powerful court grappled Tuesday with the intractable and potentially catastrophic problem of climate change, weighing whether constitutional questions surrounding President Obama’s climate change regulations should trump the moral obligations of upholding a plan to curb global warming.  The president’s Clean Power Plan generated intense interest as the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia heard oral arguments over West Virginia vs. E.P.A., the lawsuit filed by 28 states and hundreds of companies and industry groups against the Obama administration’s climate rules. People camped overnight in the rain outside the federal courthouse to grab seats before arguments began.  And those arguments took on a lofty tone as the judges considered the administration’s actions in the wake of Mr. Obama’s failure with Congress. The administration has fallen back on the 46-year-old Clean Air Act to justify emissions controls Congress would not pass.  “The policy is laudable,” said Judge Brett Kavanaugh, a George W. Bush appointee. “The earth is warming. Humans are contributing. I understand the international impact and the problem of the commons. The pope’s involved. And I understand the frustration with Congress.”  But, he said: “If Congress does this, they can account for the people who lose their jobs. If we do this, we can’t.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A Justice Department lawyer, Eric Hostetler, agreed that the Clean Air Act had rarely been used in the way the administration is trying. But, he said, “Just because you haven’t used the fire extinguisher in your house doesn’t mean you shouldn’t use it if your house is burning down.”  Administration officials have expressed optimism about the outcome of the case. The federal panel — with six judges appointed by Democratic presidents and four by Republicans — appears to benefit their side. Even if the panel splits, 5 to 5, the regulation would stand, pending an almost certain appeal to the Supreme Court.  Supporters, opponents and judges all painted a picture of Mr. Obama’s climate policy as sweeping and historic.  “This is a huge case,” Judge Kavanaugh said. “It has huge economic and political consequences. This has huge international consequences.”  But opponents, led by West Virginia’s solicitor general, Elbert Lin, described a regulation with a scope that far exceeds the intent of the law in an effort to transform the nation’s electricity system.  “The E.P.A. has invoked a little-used provision in the Clean Air Act and used it to justify creation of a new energy economy,” Mr. Lin told the judges.  The Environmental Protection Agency relied on an obscure provision of the Clean Air Act, Section 111 (d), last year to put forth an aggressive rule aimed at cutting planet-warming carbon dioxide emissions from power plants 32 percent by 2030 from 2005 levels.  Photo  Traditionally, when the E.P.A. puts forth such a pollution reduction rule, it includes a requirement for polluting entities to purchase existing technology, such as smokestack “scrubbers,” to cut pollution. But no such commercially available technology exists for reducing carbon dioxide.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Instead, the E.P.A. has assigned each state a target to cut emissions, and asked states to come up with comprehensive plans to do so. To meet those targets, most states would have to shut down polluting coal-fired electric plants and replace them with clean sources like wind and solar. The rule is also intended to push states to institute interstate “cap-and-trade” systems, allowing polluters to buy and sell allowances to pollute. If states do not produce rules, the E.P.A. will impose its own state plan, which is expected to follow the cap-and-trade model.  Mr. Obama tried but failed to push a cap-and-trade bill through Congress in 2010. Opponents of the Clean Power Plan argued that Mr. Obama was using his executive authority to push through a policy he could not persuade Congress to enact.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Why isn’t this debate going on on the floor of the Senate instead of with a group of unelected officials?” asked Judge Thomas Griffith, a George W. Bush appointee.  Among the most prominent opponents of the plan is Laurence H. Tribe, a constitutional authority who was Mr. Obama’s mentor at Harvard Law School.  “This action by the E.P.A. is impermissible,” Mr. Tribe told the court.  Judge David Tatel, an appointee of President Bill Clinton, appeared to disagree. He likened the rule to the Americans With Disabilities Act, in which the federal government set standards for states to make public spaces accessible to people with disabilities, and supplied states with federally devised plans for doing so. Tribe pushed back at that comparison.  “Imagine if Congress had been unable to pass the Americans With Disabilities Act, as it was unable to pass cap-and-trade, and if instead that same agency told states they had to each pass a mini-A.D.A., and said if they don’t, we will use executive authority to put it into place?” he said.  Both judges and lawyers also weighed the wider implications of a global warming policy. The Clean Power Plan gave Mr. Obama the leverage to negotiate the Paris Agreement, the first global climate change deal committing nearly every country to some action to lower planet-warming emissions.  The rule comes in the context of “the most urgent environmental threat our nation has ever faced,” Mr. Hostetler said.  Judge Sri Srinivasan, who has been mentioned as a possible nominee to the Supreme Court should Hillary Clinton be elected president, noted that the Clean Air Act and subsequent Supreme Court statute gave the E.P.A. broad authority to regulation carbon dioxide.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You wouldn’t dispute that Congress delegates authority to regulate carbon dioxide from power plants,” he said. “This is a way to regulate carbon dioxide.”  Opponents also brought up a question about the rule raised by clerical error in a 1990 update of the Clean Air Act. That update accidentally included conflicting versions of the amendment. There is a House version, which by some readings could forbid the E.P.A. from regulating carbon dioxide from power plants if it also regulates other pollutants under a different section of the law. A Senate version would more clearly appear to permit double regulation. But the frustrated judges seemed to find the matter unclear.  Judge Kavanaugh told Mr. Lin that his justification, in the legal briefings, for reading only the House provision “is a hall of mirrors.”  He added, “I needed a drink after going through all your footnotes.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — During the 2012 race for president, the issue of climate change was nearly invisible. President Obama and his Republican opponent, Mitt Romney, almost never spoke about it, and it did not come up during their debates. There was far more talk of increasing oil and gas production than of cutting emissions.  But this year, as Hillary Clinton thrusts climate change to the heart of her campaign, the issue is taking on a prominence it has never before had in a presidential general election.  In speeches, Mrs. Clinton regularly highlights her plan to combat global warming, and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, praised her at the Democratic National Convention last week for putting it at “the center” of her foreign policy.  Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, her main rival in the primaries, spoke of the issue forcefully, saying that “this election is about climate change.” The party platform calls for a price — essentially a tax — on carbon pollution.  Mrs. Clinton’s opponent in the November election, Donald J. Trump, has gone further than any other Republican presidential nominee in opposing climate change policy. He often mocks the established science of human-caused climate change and dismisses it as a hoax. The Republican platform calls climate change policy “the triumph of extremism over common sense.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The divide between the two parties over the issue is the widest it has been in the decades since it emerged as a public policy matter. That is all the more remarkable given that during the 2008 election, the Democratic and Republican positions on climate change were almost identical.  That year, Mr. Obama and the Republican nominee, Senator John McCain of Arizona, spoke of the need to address the human causes of global warming, and they proposed a nearly identical policy — a “cap-and-trade” plan, which would have limited carbon dioxide emissions and created a market for trading pollution credits.  “The elevated conversation about climate change in this election is truly historic,” said Gene Karpinski, the president of the League of Conservation Voters, who addressed the Democratic convention on Thursday.  “In 2012, no one asked about it and the candidates didn’t talk about it,” he said. “In 2008, the candidates were in the same place, so no one talked about it. They’ve never talked about it this much, and the contrast between candidates has never been sharper.”  Democratic strategists once sidestepped the issue, seeing any proposal that might raise energy prices as politically risky. But they are now pushing it to the forefront.  At the convention, organizers played a short film by James Cameron, the director of blockbusters like “Titanic,” on the dangers of climate change. Another convention video montage put a spotlight on Mrs. Clinton’s role at the 2009 climate change summit meeting in Copenhagen. As part of a wide-ranging climate plan, she has set ambitious goals for producing energy from renewable sources, including by installing a half-billion solar panels by 2020.  Democratic Senate candidates in swing states like Pennsylvania and Florida are also embracing the issue. They have been emboldened by polls showing that a growing majority of Americans accept the science of climate change and would support candidates of either party who vowed to address the issue.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  A Gallup poll in March found that 65 percent of Americans believed that climate change was caused by human activity, an increase of 10 points from a year earlier. The poll found that 38 percent of Republicans believed the same thing, an increase of four points from a year earlier. The poll also found that 76 percent of Americans ages 18 to 29 accepted that human activity is behind climate change.  Some Republican strategists say they are concerned that Mr. Trump’s views on the issue could push younger voters away from the party for the long term, much as they fear that his immigration policies and remarks about women could alienate Hispanics and female voters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It’s important for Republican candidates to talk about the issue intelligently and not be dismissive of climate change,” said Whit Ayres, a Republican pollster. He worked for the presidential campaign of Senator Marco Rubio of Florida and now works for an advocacy group backing Mr. Rubio’s Senate re-election campaign.  “The way you talk about climate change sends a signal to millennials about how sensitive you are to the environment,” Mr. Ayres said. “Millennials recently passed baby boomers to become the largest generation, so any party that hopes to own the future politically needs to be attractive to millennials.”  As they have on other policy issues this year, some Republican candidates are staking out positions different from Mr. Trump’s. Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, a state where voters tend to favor environmentally friendly candidates, has endorsed Mr. Trump but has broken with her party to vote to uphold the Obama administration’s climate change regulations. Her campaign website says she is “working to combat the effects of climate change.”  Still, most Republicans remain strongly opposed to Mr. Obama’s climate change policies, specifically a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations aimed at curbing planet-warming emissions from coal-fired power plants. If enacted, those rules could shut down hundreds of such plants.  Mr. Trump has vowed to rescind Mr. Obama’s climate change rules, and he has called for more fossil fuel drilling and fewer environmental regulations. He has said he would “cancel” the accord reached last year in France that commits nearly every nation to taking action to curb climate change.  But party strategists say there is a way for Republicans who may be positioning themselves to run for president in 2020 or 2024, such as Mr. Rubio or the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, to talk about opposing the Obama rules without alienating younger voters.  “It’s important for the next generation of Republicans to show that they get it, and that they’re not just playing the old orthodoxy,” said Kevin Sheridan, a Republican strategist who was Mr. Ryan’s communications director when he ran for vice president with Mr. Romney in 2012.  Mr. Sheridan and other Republican strategists said it was unclear how Mr. Trump’s dismissive position on climate change would affect the party’s future.  “Anything that Trump says where he uses rhetoric that something’s a hoax or crooked — no one else in the party gets lumped in with that,” said Douglas Heye, a Republican strategist who was deputy communications director for Eric Cantor of Virginia, a former House majority leader. “That’s Trump-specific bombastic rhetoric.”
Mrs. Clinton, in her first remarks to supporters after the election, said Americans owed Mr. Trump “an open mind and a chance to lead.” Choking back tears at times, she said she was “sorry that we did not win this election for the values we share and the vision we hold for our country.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This is painful, and it will be for a long time,” Mrs. Clinton said, standing beside her husband, former President Bill Clinton, in a tableau that underscored the end of a nearly 25-year era in which the Clintons dominated American politics.  The clash between excitement and dread was especially palpable over the likelihood that Mr. Trump, at the head of a unified Republican government, would try to reverse Obama administration policies and appoint a conservative Supreme Court justice. The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, indicated on Wednesday that Republicans would try to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and Democrats privately began strategizing to thwart that agenda. Republicans also expanded their power in state capitals, and Democrats pledged resistance.  Foreign leaders who have had tense relations with Mr. Obama were particularly welcoming to Mr. Trump. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel called Mr. Trump “a true friend” of Israel, while President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said he hoped to have a “constructive dialogue” with him. Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin had previously exchanged warm words, to the consternation of both Democratic and Republican leaders, but Trump advisers said on Wednesday that the two leaders had not spoken by phone yet.  Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, whose immigration policies Mr. Trump has dismissed as “insane,” offered her cooperation but emphasized the importance of human rights, while President François Hollande of France noted that some of Mr. Trump’s views might test “the values and the interests that we share with the United States.” Mexican officials congratulated Mr. Trump but said they would not pay for his proposed border wall, as he has flatly insisted they will.  Mr. Trump’s campaign advisers said on Wednesday that he had been fielding calls from politicians like Mr. Ryan and world leaders, while also assembling a cabinet and White House team and selecting a conservative nominee for the Supreme Court vacancy. They said Mr. Trump was inclined to roll out a few cabinet nominations at a time, rather than kicking them off with one high-profile pick for a critical department like Treasury or State.  Among the candidates for cabinet secretaries and advisers are members of Mr. Trump’s inner circle, aides said, including Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a crucial adviser on policy issues; Steven Mnuchin, a businessman who was Mr. Trump’s national finance chairman; Rudolph W. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York; Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey; and Newt Gingrich, a former speaker of the House.  Advisers said Mr. Trump had also started thinking about ways to unite the country. Democratic leaders quickly embraced a policy priority that he highlighted in his victory speech: infrastructure spending.  Still, more than a third of Americans said in exit polls on Tuesday that they would be frightened of a Trump presidency. Among those who voted for Mrs. Clinton, the feeling was almost unanimous: 92 percent said Mr. Trump scared them.  How Will a Trump Presidency Affect Your Country? We want to hear from readers outside the United States on the election of Donald J. Trump. We may publish a selection of the responses. Queremos saber qué opinan nuestros lectores afuera de Estados Unidos tras la elección de Donald Trump como presidente de Estados Unidos. Algunas de estas respuestas podrían ser publicadas. Required fields are marked with an asterisk. How do you think a Trump presidency will affect you and your family? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump te afectará a ti y a tu familia? Continue How do you think a Trump presidency will affect your country? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump afectará a tu país? If you had a meeting with the president-elect, what is one thing you would tell him about your life and your country that could inform his foreign policy? Si te pudieras reunir con el presidente electo, ¿qué le contarías sobre tu vida y tu país para informar sus decisiones de política exterior? Continue What is your name? * ¿Cómo te llamas? Where are you from? * ¿De dónde eres? What is your phone number? ¿Cuál es tu teléfono? By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service. Thank you for your submission.  Anxieties ran strong among Hispanics, African-Americans, Muslims, immigrants, women and others who had felt disparaged or demonized by Mr. Trump, who used harsh and racially charged language in ways that upended mainstream politics. The fact that Mr. Trump had been endorsed by a Ku Klux Klan newspaper, even if he rejected it, symbolized the sense of shock that he would now lead a vibrantly diverse democracy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Alma Guel, 59, of El Paso, let out a long sigh as she started talking through the levels of emotional distress she had felt over the last 24 hours. She felt outrage, disbelief, then suspicion that the outcome was legitimate, then ashamed. She even started looking at property to buy in Mexico. Eventually, she just felt crushed.  “I was just heartbroken,” said Ms. Guel, who works in the safety department of her local electric company. “And all day today, I’ve been in a daze. I’ve never, ever been this affected by any other election.”  Many conservatives felt just as strongly — but in the opposite direction. The conservative radio host Laura Ingraham was overcome with emotion on her show Wednesday. “You’re bringing tears to my eyes,” she told the Republican strategist Ed Rollins as she beamed over the meaning of Mr. Trump’s win.  Jacob Stout, 20, who owns a small contracting business in Danville, Ky., said the result thrilled him because of the promise of bold action in Washington. “I’m excited, man. I’m not going to lie,” he said. “We’ve seen, especially the last eight years, talk but not drastic change that benefits the citizens. The idea that a citizen would be taking the presidency as opposed to a politician, I think that’s got people excited.”  Photo  His wife, Chloe Joslin, 24, was more tempered in her expectations, even though she also voted for Mr. Trump.  “Oh, my goodness, you see people who are disowning friends over who they are voting for,” said Ms. Joslin, a communications instructor. “It’s been a very heated race.”  Politicians also joined business leaders, as well as the many Americans with retirement and savings accounts, in keeping a nervous eye on the world financial markets, fearing the sort of backlash that wounded Britain after its vote in June to leave the European Union. While some business leaders worried that the nation would slide into recession, others were hopeful that Mr. Trump’s proposals of tax cuts, infrastructure spending and relaxed regulations would be welcomed by the markets, which reversed sharp declines overnight.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Political activity and reactions in both parties were in a surreal state of suspended animation as Republicans and Democrats began anticipating Mr. Trump’s moves. Mr. Ryan said at a news conference Wednesday that Mr. Trump had a “mandate” for his vision of government, but was sparing on the details of how they would work together. Mr. Ryan stopped campaigning for him last month after revelations that Mr. Trump had boasted about sexual assault.  Mr. Ryan said that he had “spoken with Donald twice in the last 18 hours.”  “We talked about the work ahead of us, and the importance of bringing the nation together,” he said. “This needs to be a time of redemption, not a time of recrimination.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Ryan could have been hinting at his own fate. There are more than a few restless conservatives in his conference in the House who were agitating for his ouster before the election because of his failure to fully embrace Mr. Trump. And whether that discontent will die down is far from clear.  Other Republicans who made their reservations about Mr. Trump proudly known before the election tried to be gracious, though some sounded more skeptical than optimistic.  Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who became a public face of the anti-Trump faction on Capitol Hill, said he and his family had asked God to steer Mr. Trump in the right direction. “We pray that he will lead wisely and faithfully keep his oath to a Constitution of limited government,” Mr. Sasse said in a statement.  Then he promised to hold Mr. Trump to his word. “Starting today, I will do everything in my power to hold the president to his promises,” he said.  Elsewhere, the transition of power seemed to be unfolding in an orderly fashion. Word came from the Pentagon on Wednesday morning that Mr. Trump would begin receiving the same classified intelligence briefings as the president. And the defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter, said in a statement that he was committed to a smooth passing of power to the next commander in chief.
“The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer,” Mr. Trump told supporters around 3 a.m. on Wednesday at a rally in New York City, just after Mrs. Clinton called to concede.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a departure from a blistering campaign in which he repeatedly stoked division, Mr. Trump sought to do something he had conspicuously avoided as a candidate: Appeal for unity.  “Now it’s time for America to bind the wounds of division,” he said. “It is time for us to come together as one united people. It’s time.”  That, he added, “is so important to me.”  He offered unusually warm words for Mrs. Clinton, who he has suggested should be in jail, saying she was owed “a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country.”  Bolstered by Mr. Trump’s strong showing, Republicans retained control of the Senate. Only one Republican-controlled seat, in Illinois, fell to Democrats early in the evening. And Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, a Republican, easily won re-election in a race that had been among the country’s most competitive. A handful of other Republican incumbents facing difficult races were running better than expected.  Mr. Trump’s win — stretching across the battleground states of Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania — seemed likely to set off financial jitters and immediate unease among international allies, many of which were startled when Mr. Trump in his campaign cast doubt on the necessity of America’s military commitments abroad and its allegiance to international economic partnerships.  From the moment he entered the campaign, with a shocking set of claims that Mexican immigrants were rapists and criminals, Mr. Trump was widely underestimated as a candidate, first by his opponents for the Republican nomination and later by Mrs. Clinton, his Democratic rival. His rise was largely missed by polling organizations and data analysts. And an air of improbability trailed his campaign, to the detriment of those who dismissed his angry message, his improvisational style and his appeal to disillusioned voters.  He suggested remedies that raised questions of constitutionality, like a ban on Muslims entering the United States.  He threatened opponents, promising lawsuits against news organizations that covered him critically and women who accused him of sexual assault. At times, he simply lied.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump’s unfiltered rallies and unshakable self-regard attracted a zealous following, fusing unsubtle identity politics with an economic populism that often defied party doctrine.  His rallies — furious, entertaining, heavy on name-calling and nationalist overtones — became the nexus of a political movement, with daily promises of sweeping victory, in the election and otherwise, and an insistence that the country’s political machinery was “rigged” against Mr. Trump and those who admired him.  Video  He seemed to embody the success and grandeur that so many of his followers felt was missing from their own lives — and from the country itself. And he scoffed at the poll-driven word-parsing ways of modern politics, calling them a waste of time and money. Instead, he relied on his gut.  At his victory party at the New York Hilton Midtown, where a raucous crowd indulged in a cash bar and wore hats bearing his ubiquitous campaign slogan “Make America Great Again,” voters expressed gratification that their voices had, at last, been heard.  “He was talking to people who weren’t being spoken to,” said Joseph Gravagna, 37, a marketing company owner from Rockland County, N.Y. “That’s how I knew he was going to win.”  For Mrs. Clinton, the defeat signaled an astonishing end to a political dynasty that has colored Democratic politics for a generation. Eight years after losing to President Obama in the Democratic primary — and 16 years after leaving the White House for the United States Senate, as President Bill Clinton exited office — she had seemed positioned to carry on two legacies: her husband’s and the president’s.  Video  Her shocking loss was a devastating turn for the sprawling world of Clinton aides and strategists who believed they had built an electoral machine that would swamp Mr. Trump’s ragtag band of loyal operatives and family members, many of whom had no experience running a national campaign.  On Tuesday night, stricken Clinton aides who believed that Mr. Trump had no mathematical path to victory, anxiously paced the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center as states in which they were confident of victory, like Florida and North Carolina, either fell to Mr. Trump or seemed in danger of tipping his way.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton watched the grim results roll in from a suite at the nearby Peninsula Hotel, surrounded by her family, friends and advisers who had the day before celebrated her candidacy with a champagne toast on her campaign plane.  But over and over, Mrs. Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate were exposed. She failed to excite voters hungry for change. She struggled to build trust with Americans who were baffled by her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state. And she strained to make a persuasive case for herself as a champion of the economically downtrodden after delivering perfunctory paid speeches that earned her millions of dollars.  The returns Tuesday also amounted to a historic rebuke of the Democratic Party from the white blue-collar voters who had formed the party base from the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt to Mr. Clinton’s. Yet Mrs. Clinton and her advisers had taken for granted that states like Michigan and Wisconsin would stick with a Democratic nominee, and that she could repeat Mr. Obama’s strategy of mobilizing the party’s ascendant liberal coalition rather than pursuing a more moderate course like her husband did 24 years ago.  But not until these voters were offered a Republican who ran as an unapologetic populist, railing against foreign trade deals and illegal immigration, did they move so drastically away from their ancestral political home.  To the surprise of many on the left, white voters who had helped elect the nation’s first black president, appeared more reluctant to line up behind a white woman.  From Pennsylvania to Wisconsin, industrial towns once full of union voters who for decades offered their votes to Democratic presidential candidates, even in the party’s lean years, shifted to Mr. Trump’s Republican Party. One county in the Mahoning Valley of Ohio, Trumbull, went to Mr. Trump by a six-point margin. Four years ago, Mr. Obama won there by 22 points.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mrs. Clinton’s loss was especially crushing to millions who had cheered her march toward history as, they hoped, the nation’s first female president. For supporters, the election often felt like a referendum on gender progress: an opportunity to elevate a woman to the nation’s top job and to repudiate a man whose remarkably boorish behavior toward women had assumed center stage during much of the campaign.  Mr. Trump boasted, in a 2005 video released last month, about using his public profile to commit sexual assault. He suggested that female political rivals lacked a presidential “look.” He ranked women on a scale of one to 10, even holding forth on the desirability of his own daughter — the kind of throwback male behavior that many in the country assumed would disqualify a candidate for high office.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Tuesday, the public’s verdict was rendered.  Uncertainty abounds as Mr. Trump prepares to take office. His campaign featured a shape-shifting list of policy proposals, often seeming to change hour to hour. His staff was in constant turmoil, with Mr. Trump’s children serving critical campaign roles and a rotating cast of advisers alternately seeking access to Mr. Trump’s ear, losing it and, often, regaining it, depending on the day.  Even Mr. Trump’s full embrace of the Republican Party came exceedingly late in life, leaving members of both parties unsure about what he truly believes. He has donated heavily to both parties and has long described his politics as the transactional reality of a businessman.  Mr. Trump’s dozens of business entanglements — many of them in foreign countries — will follow him into the Oval Office, raising questions about potential conflicts of interest. His refusal to release his tax returns, and his acknowledgment that he did not pay federal income taxes for years, has left the American people with considerable gaps in their understanding of the financial dealings.  But this they do know: Mr. Trump will thoroughly reimagine the tone, standards and expectations of the presidency, molding it in his own self-aggrandizing image.  He is set to take the oath of office on Jan. 20.
Email, a main conduit of communication for two decades, now appears so vulnerable that the nation seems to be wondering whether its bursting inboxes can ever be safe. Election systems, the underpinning of democracy, seem to be at such risk that it is unimaginable that the United States will go into another national election without treating them as “critical infrastructure.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But President Obama has been oddly quiet on these issues. He delivered a private warning to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia during their final face-to-face encounter two months ago, aides say. Still, Mr. Obama has barely spoken publicly about the implications of foreign meddling in the election. His instincts, those who have worked with him on cyberissues say, are to deal with the problem by developing new norms of international behavior or authorizing covert action rather than direct confrontation.  After a series of debates in the Situation Room, Mr. Obama and his aides concluded that any public retaliation should be postponed until after the election — to avoid the appearance that politics influenced his decision and to avoid provoking Russian counterstrikes while voting is underway. It remains unclear whether Mr. Obama will act after Tuesday, as his aides hint, or leave the decision about a “proportional response” to his successor.  Cybersleuths, historians and strategists will debate for years whether Russia’s actions reflected a grand campaign of interference or mere opportunism on the part of Mr. Putin. While the administration has warned for years about the possibility of catastrophic attacks, what has happened in the past six months has been far more subtle.  Russia has used the techniques — what they call “hybrid war,” mixing new technologies with old-fashioned propaganda, misinformation and disruption — for years in former Soviet states and elsewhere in Europe. The only surprise was that Mr. Putin, as he intensified confrontations with Washington as part of a nationalist campaign to solidify his own power amid a deteriorating economy, was willing to take them to American shores.  The most common theory is that while the Russian leader would prefer the election of Donald J. Trump — in part because Mr. Trump has suggested that NATO is irrelevant and that the United States should pull its troops back to American shores — his primary motive is to undercut what he views as a smug American sense of superiority about its democratic processes.  Madeleine K. Albright, a former secretary of state who is vigorously supporting Hillary Clinton, wrote recently that Mr. Putin’s goal was “to create doubt about the validity of the U.S. election results, and to make us seem hypocritical when we question the conduct of elections in other countries.”  If so, this is a very different use of power than what the Obama administration has long prepared the nation for.  Four years ago, Leon E. Panetta, the defense secretary at the time, warned of an impending “cyber Pearl Harbor” in which enemies could “contaminate the water supply in major cities or shut down the power grid across large parts of the country,” perhaps in conjunction with a conventional attack.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That is still a risk, of course — one that the Pentagon and its United States Cyber Command spend billions of dollars trying to deter. Yet America’s main adversaries know those steps would constitute an act of war, most likely prompting an overwhelming military response.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  What has come instead — doling out stolen emails, testing the defenses of the voting system — clearly caught the administration off guard.  “The unprecedented use of cyberintrusions to influence this election should galvanize our country to act,” said John P. Carlin, who left the Justice Department two weeks ago as assistant attorney general for national security, a post in which he helped oversee legal responses to major Chinese and Iranian attacks on American banks and other institutions. “Whoever is elected, how to regulate, defend and deter in cyberspace must be at the top of the national security agenda.”  Yet he noted that “in a campaign where cyberintrusions and threats dominated the news more than any other in American history, there has been surprisingly little discussion on how our country should confront the problem going forward.”  The severity of the challenge has been particularly evident even in the final days of the campaign.  The Department of Homeland Security invited reporters on Friday to tour its war room, a vast monitoring center that is buried deep in a nondescript building in Virginia and is connected to the National Security Agency and sensors running through government networks. The center is supposed to be the internet equivalent of the giant North American Aerospace Defense Command in Cheyenne Mountain, just outside Colorado Springs, which opened almost exactly 50 years ago to scan the skies and warn of incoming Soviet nuclear missiles.  The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center is expected to do the same thing, but its vision is limited to federal computer systems. Officials conceded that if a foreign power began tinkering with the registration rolls or vote-tallying systems on Tuesday — a process run by the states — it was unlikely that direct evidence would show up on the center’s screens.  “Our partners would have to call us,” one senior official conceded.  Here on Sunday night in the battleground state of New Hampshire, Mrs. Clinton held one of the final rallies of her campaign just miles from the headquarters of a company that was taken out two weeks ago in a “denial of service” attack that paralyzed websites along the East Coast.  Officials at the company, Dyn DNS, and others like it are frantically looking for ways to ward off another attack on Election Day out of fear that it could freeze up websites used for getting out the vote, showing people how to get to polling places or reporting results.  And just a few hours before she arrived here, Mrs. Clinton got news that the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, had informed Congress that his agency’s review of the latest batch of her emails, found on the computer of former Representative Anthony D. Weiner of New York, the estranged husband of one of Mrs. Clinton’s top aides, did nothing to change his view of the case.  Mrs. Clinton’s decision to use a private email server, of course, was the original digital act of this election season — the decision by Mrs. Clinton that, to keep her personal emails private, she would conduct her government business from a private server.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Comey has never conclusively determined whether the Russians, or any other foreign power, broke into that server, which was kept in the Clintons’ home in Chappaqua, N.Y. But the Russians had been behind many other break-ins, his investigators noted, including of the unclassified systems of the State Department, the White House and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. If they skipped Mrs. Clinton’s server, one investigator noted, it must have been an oversight.
Photo  On Monday night, the late-night comics got their last crack at the 2016 election.  On “The Late Show,” Stephen Colbert reunited with his former Comedy Central compatriot Jon Stewart, who took a swipe at Donald J. Trump, referring to the candidate as an “angry tax-and-draft-dodging little orange groundhog.”  The actor Benedict Cumberbatch joined James Corden on “The Late Late Show.” Donning a red velvet smoking jacket, the star of “Doctor Strange” read a bedtime story called “The Story of the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election.” The fairy tale, which was more Grimm than Disney, featured a woman dressed from head to toe in beige and her attempt to defeat a big orange monster so she could rule the realm.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Jimmy Kimmel offered news of a surprise endorsement for Hillary Clinton: Donald Trump.
For Mr. Trump, a serial exploiter of old-line media, it was a painful yet potent lesson in the power of new media to agitate and motivate a vast, unseen audience. Inundated with replies of disgust and support, he eventually backtracked online (“I was always a big fan of Kim Novak”) and sent her a rueful private letter.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A year later, Mr. Trump has mastered Twitter in a way no candidate for president ever has, unleashing and redefining its power as a tool of political promotion, distraction, score-settling and attack — and turning a 140-character task that other candidates farm out to young staff members into a centerpiece of his campaign.  In the process, he has managed to fulfill a vision, long predicted but slow to materialize, sketched out a decade ago by a handful of digital campaign strategists: a White House candidacy that forgoes costly, conventional methods of political communication and relies instead on the free, urgent and visceral platforms of social media.  “He’s used social media to replace the traditional apparatus of a political campaign,” said Zac Moffatt, who oversaw Mitt Romney’s digital outreach in 2012 and co-founded Targeted Victory, a consulting firm focused on online campaign tactics. “Trump is living on this medium.”  Now, as Mr. Trump enters an uncertain period in his campaign, even rival campaigns acknowledge that Twitter is providing a powerful bulwark against a slide in his poll numbers, by allowing millions of supporters to make his case for him and deflect the controversies he delights in touching off.  How Donald Trump Uses Twitter (Hint: Impulsively) We look at what makes a selection of his tweets so Trumpian.  His online dominance is striking: Over the past two months, on Twitter alone, he has been mentioned in 6.3 million conversations, eight times as many as Republican rivals like Marco Rubio, Carly Fiorina and Ben Carson — not to mention more than three times as many as Hillary Rodham Clinton and nearly four times as many as Bernie Sanders. He is retweeted more than twice as often as Mrs. Clinton and about 13 times more frequently than Jeb Bush, according to data compiled as of Friday by Edelman Berland, a market research firm that studies social media. His Twitter following (4.36 million) dwarfs that of the rest of the Republican field, and in the coming weeks, he is expected to surpass Mrs. Clinton (4.39 million).  In an interview at his office — interrupted repeatedly by Mr. Trump’s picking up his Samsung Galaxy cellphone, loading new tweets with his index finger and marveling at his nonstop mentions (“Watch this!” he implored) — the candidate compared his Twitter feed to a newspaper with a single, glorious voice: his own.  “The Ernest Hemingway of a hundred and forty characters,” he said, quoting a fan.  In the past, Mr. Trump said, when dealing with a dishonest rival “there was nothing you can do other than sue.”  “Which I’ve done,” he added. “But it’s a long process.”  Now, he simply tweets. Caustically, colorfully and repeatedly.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Suddenly, he said of his foes, “I have more power than they do.”  “I can let people know that they were a fraud,” he continued. “I can let people know that they have no talent, that they didn’t know what they’re doing. You have a voice.”  On Twitter, Mr. Trump has assembled an online SWAT team of devoted (some say rabid) supporters who spring into action with stunning speed. In a pattern that has played out over and over, he makes a provocative remark, like one about Mrs. Fiorina’s face — “Would anybody vote for that?’’ — and hundreds of thousands of strangers defend him, spread his message and engage in emotional debates with his critics, all the while ensuring he remains the subject of a constant conversation.  When Mr. Trump wanted to defend his failure to correct a white voter who declared that Barack Obama is a Muslim, he tapped out a message on Sept. 19.  It was quickly retweeted by 7,000 people, and over roughly six hours it provoked more than 1,000 discussions that mentioned him. Forty percent of those were pro-Trump in sentiment, according to Edelman Berland.  The next day, Mr. Bush fired off an unusually pointed tweet, by his standards, attacking a campaign ad about Sept. 11 that was made by allies of Mrs. Clinton. But its life cycle was comparatively short and tepid. It received only about one-twelfth as many retweets, and provoked around 200 conversations over about an hour, of which 5 percent were pro-Bush, the firm found.  Mike Berland, a political operative who worked on Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign and is chief executive of Edelman Berland, calls it the “Wall of Trump.”  “We’ve never seen this before in politics,” Mr. Berland said. “This is not just a rally that happens once in a while. This is a continuous Trump rally that happens on Twitter at all hours. He fills the Twitter stadium every day.”  Many mornings around 3:30, Eric Popkin, a 53-year-old project manager at an architecture firm with no ties to the campaign, logs on to his computer in Orlando, Fla., and creates elaborate graphics in support of Mr. Trump that he disseminates on Twitter.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s candor and style inspire a loyalty he cannot quite explain. “It’s like a sports team. If you are from New York, and you like the Jets or Giants and somebody is bad-mouthing your team, there is kind of knee-jerk reaction to defend them,” Mr. Popkin said. “We have an emotional connection to him. It’s good old human nature.”  A Snapshot of Two Tweets What happened when Donald J. Trump and Jeb Bush posted provocative messages on Twitter during the same time period. (See Mr. Trump’s tweet and Mr. Bush’s tweet.) Trump Bush Duration in Hours of Discussion 6 1 Retweets 7,000 600 Favorites 14,000 1,100 Discussions Provoked Using Twitter Handle More than 1,000 More than 200  Not all of the outpouring is spontaneous. Supporters have organized themselves into online squads that defend Mr. Trump. A man identifying himself as Gary Forbes has recruited volunteer “operatives” on Twitter, sending out daily emails directing them to emphasize pro-Trump messages (“Trump’s immigration plan will protect thousands of women from abuse”) and target rival candidates (“What Jeb must do for Fox Billionaire Murdoch’s $$$”). A project code-named “Magic Kingdom” took aim last week at Mr. Rubio, the senator from Florida, according to an email obtained by The New York Times.  Asked about the effort, Mr. Forbes directed questions to the Trump campaign. A Trump spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, said the campaign had no affiliation with Mr. Forbes.  Mr. Trump, 69, is an improbable virtuoso of the tweet. He has no computer in his office (a staff member brings in a laptop to show him videos) and asks aides to print his emails for consumption the old-fashioned way. But around 2011, his staff turned him on to the possibilities of @realdonaldtrump, a sleepy account started in 2009 that largely quoted from Mr. Trump’s books.  He quickly adapted to Twitter’s stock in trade: endless feuds, ego stroking and casual cruelty. He usually dictates messages to his assistant during the day and types them himself at home or on the golf course, from which he has sent more than 100, according to geographic data embedded in his tweets. The most frequently used words in his tweets: “great” (more than 700 times), “winner” or “winners” (43), and “loser” or “losers” (34). In all, he has sent more than 28,000 tweets — the rough equivalent of 12 a day.  Mr. Trump has called Arianna Huffington, the liberal website publisher, “unattractive both inside and out”; described Bette Midler as “extremely unattractive”; and declared that President Obama had guaranteed “you won’t see another black president for generations.”  Asked about his judgment in sending those messages, he defended all but one: his mockery of Ms. Novak. “I would have preferred I didn’t send it,” Mr. Trump said. “That was done in fun, but sometimes you do things in fun and they turn out to be hurtful, and I don’t like doing that.”  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  He has developed strong views about the rules, rituals and rhythms of Twitter. On the 140-character limit: “I wish it were longer on 10 percent of the occasions.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On deleting tweets: “One of the things I do find is that when you delete it, it becomes a bigger story than having it.”  That, of course, has not stopped him from deleting tweets, like a 2013 message in which he extended “best wishes to all, even the haters and losers, on this special date, September 11th.”  His followers on Twitter did not seem to mind. Back in his office at Trump Tower the other day, he kept collecting new mentions, even though he had not sent a tweet in hours.  “Look at this,” Mr. Trump beckoned. “So this is eight seconds ago. See that?” Messages scrolled by in a blur. “That’s eight seconds ago these tweets came in.”  He looked up with satisfaction. “How,” he asked, “can you do better than that?”
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Monday declined to hear a case about whether the N.C.A.A. is violating federal antitrust laws by restricting what college athletes can earn.  Last year, the federal appeals court in California issued a decision that managed to make both sides unhappy. The court ruled against the association, saying its amateurism rule violated the antitrust laws.  But the court went on to say that the association may restrict colleges from compensating athletes beyond offering scholarships and a few thousand dollars for “the cost of attendance.” The appeals court rejected a trial judge’s proposed alternative that colleges be allowed to pay athletes up to $5,000 per year in deferred compensation.  Video  Both sides sought Supreme Court review. As is their custom, the justices gave no reasons for turning down the case.  The case was brought by Ed O’Bannon, a former U.C.L.A. basketball star, and other current and former college football and basketball players. They sought compensation for the commercial use of their names and images in video games, archival recordings and the like.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The N.C.A.A. responded that college athletes were amateurs and that the distinctive nature of college sports would be destroyed by turning a scholastic model into a professional one.  In addition to asking the justices to weigh in on the antitrust question, the association also sought review of a related appeals court ruling. The association said the First Amendment allowed use of the athletes’ names and likenesses without compensation. The lower courts are divided on the legal standards for when commercial uses of celebrities’ images require payments to them.  The case, N.C.A.A v. O’Bannon, No. 15-1388, along with O’Bannon v. N.C.A.A., No. 15-1167, is part of a larger debate over the treatment of athletes who participate in sports that are immensely lucrative for their colleges and universities.
(APPLAUSE)  Hillary has worked very long and very hard over a long period of time, and we owe her a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  I mean that very sincerely.  (APPLAUSE)  Now it’s time for America to bind the wounds of division; have to get together. To all Republicans and Democrats and independents across this nation, I say it is time for us to come together as one united people.  (APPLAUSE)  It’s time. I pledge to every citizen of our land that I will be president for all Americans, and this is so important to me.  (APPLAUSE)  For those who have chosen not to support me in the past, of which there were a few people. . .  (LAUGHTER)  . . . I’m reaching out to you for your guidance and your help so that we can work together and unify our great country.  (APPLAUSE)  As I’ve said from the beginning, ours was not a campaign, but rather an incredible and great movement made up of millions of hard-working men and women who love their country and want a better, brighter future for themselves and for their families.  (APPLAUSE)  It’s a movement comprised of Americans from all races, religions, backgrounds and beliefs who want and expect our government to serve the people, and serve the people it will.  (APPLAUSE)  Working together, we will begin the urgent task of rebuilding our nation and renewing the American dream. I’ve spent my entire life and business looking at the untapped potential in projects and in people all over the world. That is now what I want to do for our country.  (APPLAUSE)  Tremendous potential. I’ve gotten to know our country so well — tremendous potential. It’s going to be a beautiful thing. Every single American will have the opportunity to realize his or her fullest potential. The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  We are going to fix our inner cities and rebuild our highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, schools, hospitals. We’re going to rebuild our infrastructure, which will become, by the way, second to none. And we will put millions of our people to work as we rebuild it.  We will also finally take care of our great veterans.  (APPLAUSE)  They’ve been so loyal, and I’ve gotten to know so many over this 18-month journey. The time I’ve spent with them during this campaign has been among my greatest honors. Our veterans are incredible people. We will embark upon a project of national growth and renewal. I will harness the creative talents of our people and we will call upon the best and brightest to leverage their tremendous talent for the benefit of all. It’s going to happen.  (APPLAUSE)  We have a great economic plan. We will double our growth and have the strongest economy anywhere in the world. At the same time, we will get along with all other nations willing to get along with us. We will be.  (APPLAUSE)  We’ll have great relationships. We expect to have great, great relationships. No dream is too big, no challenge is too great.  TRUMP: Nothing we want for our future is beyond our reach.  America will no longer settle for anything less than the best.  (APPLAUSE)  We must reclaim our country’s destiny and dream big and bold and daring. We have to do that. We’re going to dream of things for our country and beautiful things and successful things once again.  I want to tell the world community that while we will always put America’s interests first, we will deal fairly with everyone, with everyone — all people and all other nations. We will seek common ground, not hostility; partnership, not conflict.  And now I’d like to take this moment to thank some of the people who really helped me with this, what they are calling tonight, very, very historic victory.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  First, I want to thank my parents, who I know are looking down on me right now.  (APPLAUSE)  Great people. I’ve learned so much from them. They were wonderful in every regard. I had truly great parents.  I also want to thank my sisters, Maryanne and Elizabeth, who are here with us tonight. And, where are they? They’re here someplace. They’re very shy, actually. And my brother Robert — my great friend. Where is Robert? Where is Robert?  (APPLAUSE)  My brother Robert. And they should all be on this stage, but that’s OK. They’re great. And also my late brother, Fred. Great guy. Fantastic guy.  (APPLAUSE)  Fantastic family. I was very lucky. Great brothers, sisters; great, unbelievable parents.  To Melania and Don. . .  (APPLAUSE) . . . and Ivanka. . .  (APPLAUSE)  . . . and Eric and Tiffany and Baron, I love you and I thank you, and especially for putting up with all of those hours. This was tough.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  (APPLAUSE)  This was tough. This political stuff is nasty and it’s tough. So I want to thank my family very much. Really fantastic. Thank you all. Thank you all.  And Lara, unbelievable job, unbelievable.  Vanessa, thank you. Thank you very much.  What a great group. You’ve all given me such incredible support, and I will tell you that we have a large group of people. You know, they kept saying we have a small staff. Not so small. Look at all the people that we have. Look at all of these people.  And Kellyanne and Chris and Rudy and Steve and David. We have got — we have got tremendously talented people up here. And I want to tell you, it’s been — it’s been very, very special. I want to give a very special thanks to our former mayor, Rudy Giuliani.  (APPLAUSE)  Unbelievable. Unbelievable. He traveled with us and he went through meetings. That Rudy never changes. Where’s Rudy? Where is he? Rudy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Governor Chris Christie, folks, was unbelievable.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you, Chris.  The first man, first senator, first major, major politician, and let me tell you, he is highly respected in Washington because he’s as smart as you get: Senator Jeff Sessions. Where is Jeff?  (APPLAUSE)  Great man.  Another great man, very tough competitor. He was not easy. He was not easy. Who is that? Is that the mayor that showed up?  (LAUGHTER)  Is that Rudy? Oh, Rudy got up here.  Another great man who has been really a friend to me. But I’ll tell you, I got to know him as a competitor because he was one of the folks that was negotiating to go against those Democrats: Dr. Ben Carson. Where is Ben?  (APPLAUSE)  Where is Ben?  TRUMP: And by the way, Mike Huckabee is here someplace, and he is fantastic. Mike and his family, Sarah — thank you very much.  General Mike Flynn. Where is Mike?  (APPLAUSE)  And General Kellogg. We have over 200 generals and admirals that have endorsed our campaign. And they’re special people and it’s really an honor. We have 22 congressional Medal of Honor recipients. We have just tremendous people.  A very special person who believed me and, you know, I’d read reports that I wasn’t getting along with him. I never had a bad second with him. He’s an unbelievable star. He is. . .  (CROSSTALK)  TRUMP: That’s right. How did you possibly guess? So let me tell you about Reince, and I’ve said this. I said, Reince — and I know it, I know. Look at all those people over there. I know it. Reince is a superstar. But I said, “They can’t call you a superstar, Reince, unless we win,” because you can’t be called a superstar — like Secretariat — if Secretariat came in second, Secretariat would not have that big, beautiful bronze bust at the track at Belmont.  But I’ll tell you, Reince is really a star. And he is the hardest-working guy. And in a certain way, I did this — Reince, come up here. Where is Reince? Get over here, Reince.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  Boy oh boy oh boy. It’s about time you did this, Reince. My God.  (APPLAUSE)  Say a few words. No, come on, say something.  RNC CHAIRMAN REINCE PRIEBUS: Ladies and gentlemen, the next president of the United States, Donald Trump.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you. It’s been an honor. God bless. Thank God.  TRUMP: Amazing guy.  Our partnership with the RNC was so important to the success and what we’ve done.  So I also have to say I’ve gotten to know some incredible people — the Secret Service people.  (APPLAUSE)  They’re tough and they’re smart and they’re sharp, and I don’t want to mess around with them, I can tell you. And when I want to go and wave to a big group of people and they rip me down and put me back down on the seat. But they are fantastic people, so I want to thank the Secret Service.  (APPLAUSE)  And law enforcement in New York City. They’re here tonight.  (APPLAUSE)  These are spectacular people, sometimes underappreciated unfortunately, but we appreciate them. We know what they go through.  So, it’s been what they call a historic event, but to be really historic, we have to do a great job. And I promise you that I will not let you down. We will do a great job. We will do a great job.  (APPLAUSE)  I look very much forward to being your president, and hopefully at the end of two years or three years or four years, or maybe even eight years. . .  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  (APPLAUSE)  . . . you will say, so many of you worked so hard for us, but you will say that — you will say that that was something that you really were very proud to do and I can. . .  (CROSSTALK)  TRUMP: Thank you very much.  And I can only say that while the campaign is over, our work on this movement is now really just beginning.  (APPLAUSE)  We’re going to get to work immediately for the American people. And we’re going to be doing a job that hopefully you will be so proud of your president. You’ll be so proud. Again, it’s my honor. It was an amazing evening. It’s been an amazing two-year period. And I love this country.  (APPLAUSE) Thank you. Thank you very much.  (APPLAUSE)  Thank you to Mike Pence. Thank you.  (APPLAUSE)
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Friday entered the national debate over transgender rights, announcing that it would decide whether a transgender boy may use the boys’ bathroom in a Virginia high school.  The court is acting just a year after it established a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, as state laws and federal actions on transgender rights have prompted a welter of lawsuits. In taking the case, the court signaled that it may move more quickly in the area of transgender rights than it has in expanding gay rights.  The public debate has been ignited, in part, by a North Carolina law that requires transgender people to use bathrooms in government buildings that correspond with the gender listed on their birth certificates, a statute that has drawn protests, boycotts and lawsuits.  The case revolves around how the Obama administration is entitled to interpret a federal regulation under a 1972 law that bans discrimination “on the basis of sex” in schools that receive federal money. The legal question is whether it can also ban discrimination based on gender identity.  The Department of Education said last year that schools “generally must treat transgender students consistent with their gender identity.” In May, the department went further, saying that schools could lose federal money if they discriminate against transgender students.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  That left school districts grappling with how to treat transgender students. In August, a federal judge in Texas blocked Obama administration guidelines on restroom access for such students.  The case the Supreme Court agreed to hear concerns Gavin Grimm, who was designated female at birth but identifies as male. He attends Gloucester High School in southeastern Virginia.  For a time, school administrators allowed Mr. Grimm, 17, to use the boys’ bathroom, but the local school board later adopted a policy that required students to use the bathrooms and locker rooms for their “corresponding biological genders.” The board added that “students with gender identity issues” would be allowed to use private bathrooms.  The American Civil Liberties Union, which represents Mr. Grimm, told the justices that “girls objected to his presence in the girls’ restrooms because they perceived him to be male.” The group’s brief said requiring Mr. Grimm to use a private bathroom had been humiliating and had, quoting him, “turned him into ‘a public spectacle’ before the entire community, ‘like a walking freak show.’”  Mr. Grimm, the brief said, “avoids drinking liquids and tries not to urinate during the school day” and has, as a consequence, “developed painful urinary tract infections and felt distracted and uncomfortable in class.”  In a statement issued on Friday, Mr. Grimm said: “I never thought that my restroom use would ever turn into any kind of national debate. The only thing I ever asked for was the right to be treated like everyone else.”  He continued: “While I’m disappointed that I will have to spend my final school year being singled out and treated differently from every other guy, I will do everything I can to make sure that other transgender students don’t have to go through the same experience.”  Speaking of the Supreme Court’s decision, Shannon Minter, the legal director of the National Center for Lesbian Rights, said: “This is one of the most important days in the history of the transgender movement. The outcome of this case is likely to shape the future of that movement in ways that will resonate for a very long time.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Gary McCaleb, a lawyer with Alliance Defending Freedom, which filed a brief supporting the school board in Virginia, said, “Schools have a duty to protect the privacy and safety of all students.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “In light of the right to bodily privacy, federal law should not be twisted to require that a male be given access to the girls’ facilities, or a female to the boys’ facilities,” he said.  After Mr. Grimm challenged the school board’s bathroom policy in court last year, a divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, Va., ruled the policy unlawful. A trial judge then ordered school officials to let Mr. Grimm use the boys’ bathroom.  A 1975 regulation adopted under the 1972 law, Title IX, allowed schools to provide “separate toilet, locker rooms and shower facilities on the basis of sex.” The Fourth Circuit said that it was ambiguous and that the Education Department’s interpretation of it was entitled to “controlling weight.”  A 4-to-4 tie in the Virginia case — Gloucester County School Board v. G.G., No. 16-273 — would leave that decision in place but set no national precedent. In agreeing to hear the case, the justices set aside their recent caution in adding cases to their docket while the court is reduced to eight members.  The justices may be hoping they will have a new member to replace Antonin Scalia, who died in February, in time for the argument in the case early next year.  The court also agreed to decide whether states may bar registered sex offenders from using Facebook and other social media.  That case, Packingham v. North Carolina, No. 15-1194, concerns a North Carolina law that makes it a crime for registered sex offenders to use Facebook, Twitter and many other sites that allow the exchange of information and do not limit their membership to adults.  The law was challenged by Lester Packingham, a registered sex offender who was convicted of violating it after posting an account of having a traffic ticket dismissed. “God is good,” he wrote on Facebook.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Packingham, who had pleaded guilty in 2002 to taking indecent liberties with a minor when he was a 21-year-old student, said the law violated the First Amendment.  A North Carolina appeals court agreed, saying the law “arbitrarily burdens all registered sex offenders by preventing a wide range of communication and expressive activity unrelated to achieving its purported goal” of protecting minors.  In a 4-to-2 ruling, the North Carolina Supreme Court reversed the decision, saying that Mr. Packingham’s Facebook post was not entitled to heightened First Amendment protection because it was conduct rather than speech.  In urging the United States Supreme Court to review his case, Mr. Packingham argued that the “startling assertion” that his post amounted to conduct and not speech was at odds with “precedent and common sense.”
Photo  The election of Donald J. Trump to the presidency sent panic through much of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, which for the first time in eight years will face an administration hostile to its civil rights goals and a president-elect who has expressed a desire to reverse many of its political gains.  Jay Brown, a spokesman for the Human Rights Campaign, the nation’s largest gay rights organization, said its office had received calls throughout the day on Wednesday from frightened people who wanted to know what the election results might mean for them.  Some callers wondered if they should speed up wedding plans so they could be married before the inauguration, in case a President Trump tries to overturn gay marriage, he said. Others worried that the military would reinstate “don’t ask, don’t tell,” the ban on openly gay and lesbian service members that ended in 2011.  “This is a devastating loss for our community,” Mr. Brown said. “It is something a lot of folks are still trying to wrap their heads around.”  Mara Keisling, the executive director of the National Center for Transgender Equality, agreed. “All across America right now there are millions of people who are terrified,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has no reputation for personal animosity toward gay people, and the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay and lesbian political organization, congratulated him on his victory. He employed gay people in the Trump Organization, spent most of his life in socially liberal New York City, and surprised some Republicans this year when he said transgender people should “use the bathroom they feel is appropriate,” a view held by few others in the party.  But many L.G.B.T. leaders said they were unmoved by accounts of Mr. Trump’s personal tolerance.  “Even if people believe that about Trump, what is true is he will now be held to the G.O.P. platform,” said Rea Carey, the executive director of the National L.G.B.T.Q. Task Force. She called it the most anti-L.G.B.T. platform in recent memory.  Among its provisions: opposition to same-sex marriage, support for state laws limiting which public bathroom transgender people can use, and support for a parent’s right to subject gay and transgender children to “conversion therapy” to change their sexual orientation or gender identity, a practice the Obama administration has said should be banned for minors.  Ms. Carey called Mr. Trump’s public statements on gay and transgender issues “confusing and conflicting.” As a candidate, Mr. Trump told Fox News that he would “strongly consider” appointing Supreme Court justices who would overturn same-sex marriage but later in the campaign held a rainbow flag onstage and presented himself as gay friendly.  Mr. Trump has also promised to nullify all of Mr. Obama’s executive orders, including one that bans anti-L.G.B.T. discrimination by federal contractors and another that protects the rights of transgender students, she said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Gay and transgender leaders said they were especially alarmed when Mr. Trump chose Mike Pence, who has a long record of opposition to gay rights, as his running mate.  “What we know about Mike Pence is that he led a direct, massive and concerted effort in the state of Indiana to deny equality to L.G.B.T. people,” Ms. Carey said. “It’s not like Trump didn’t know who he was.”  As governor of Indiana, Mr. Pence opposed gay marriage and signed into law a bill that made it legal for businesses to cite religious freedom when refusing service to gay and transgender people, for example a bakery that refused to bake a cake for a same-sex wedding.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As a member of Congress, Mr. Pence voted against employment nondiscrimination protections for gay and transgender people and also voted against the repeal of “don’t ask, don’t tell.”  His opposition to gay rights goes back at least to his first congressional campaign, in 2000, when he opposed same-sex marriage and the nondiscrimination laws that protected L.G.B.T. people.  He also argued for public funding of conversion therapy and said federal funding for H.I.V./AIDS treatment should be renewed only if the government could certify that no money went to “organizations that celebrate and encourage the types of behaviors that facilitate the spreading of the H.I.V. virus,” according to an archived version of his campaign website.  Mr. Brown called Mr. Pence “one of the most anti-L.G.B.T. politicians out there.”  The divisive nature of Mr. Trump’s campaign and his positions on immigration, Muslim Americans and women’s issues also posed a threat to large numbers of gay and transgender people, Mr. Brown said.  “There is an enormous amount of fear and concern over what a Trump presidency means for those of us who are also part of the immigrant community or Muslim community or who look, think and believe differently than the folks he will be putting in charge of our agencies and our government,” he said.  News that Mr. Trump would be the next president of the United States inspired an early wistfulness for the Obama administration among some leaders. Ms. Keisling called Mr. Obama “a remarkable president for transgender rights.”  But the struggle for gay and transgender rights would continue, she said, even if the political climate drastically changed. She said she had faith in “the strength and resilience of transgender people.”  "We are going to keep working to advance policy,” Ms. Keisling said. “We’re going to fight like hell to keep existing policies, and we are going to win more than we are going to lose.”
After weeks of Mr. Trump’s accusations that the election is “rigged,” a little more than six in 10 of his supporters say they will accept the results as legitimate if he loses. More than a quarter of Mr. Trump’s supporters say they will probably not accept the outcome if Mrs. Clinton is declared the winner, and nearly 40 percent of them say they have little or no confidence that Americans’ votes will be counted properly.  The State of the Presidential Race Likely voters give their opinions on the election The State of the Presidential Race HORSE RACE AMONG LIKELY VOTERS 45 % HILLARY CLINTON 42 DONALD J. TRUMP 5 GARY JOHNSON 4 JILL STEIN VOTERS ASSESS THE ELECTION AND THEIR PARTIES AND CANDIDATES ALL VOTERS The 2016 campaign has made you feel more Excited Disgusted Neither 13 % 82 3 REPUBLICAN VOTERS The Republican Party is United Divided 14 85 Donald Trump’s candidacy has been Not had much of an effect Bad for the party Good for the party 39 41 16 DEMOCRATIC VOTERS The Democratic Party is United Divided 73 25 Hillary Clinton’s candidacy has been Not had much of an effect Bad for the party Good for the party 46 17 35 SHARP PARTISAN DIVIDE ON VOTE COUNT, FRAUD AND LEGITIMACY Confidence that the votes for president will be counted properly None Not much A lot Some SUPPORTING: 71 % 19 2 7 CLINTON 19 42 18 20 TRUMP Voter fraud in U.S. elections happens Sometimes A lot Not much Not at all SUPPORTING: 7 20 47 25 CLINTON 42 43 12 2 TRUMP If your candidate doesn't win, you will Depends Probably not accept results Accept results SUPPORTING: 86 11 2 CLINTON 63 27 7 TRUMP Importance that losing candidate publicly acknowledges the winner Not at all Not too Very Somewhat SUPPORTING: 77 15 6 2 CLINTON 36 31 12 19 TRUMP The State of the Presidential Race HORSE RACE AMONG LIKELY VOTERS SHARP PARTISAN DIVIDE ON VOTE COUNT, FRAUD AND LEGITIMACY 45 % HILLARY CLINTON Confidence that the votes for president will be counted properly 42 DONALD J. TRUMP None 5 GARY JOHNSON Not much A lot Some 4 JILL STEIN SUPPORTING: 71 % 19 2 7 CLINTON VOTERS ASSESS THE ELECTION AND THEIR PARTIES AND CANDIDATES 19 42 18 20 TRUMP ALL VOTERS The 2016 campaign has made you feel more Voter fraud in U.S. elections happens Excited Disgusted Neither Sometimes 13 % 82 3 A lot Not much Not at all SUPPORTING: REPUBLICAN VOTERS 7 20 47 25 CLINTON The Republican Party is 42 43 12 2 TRUMP United Divided 14 85 If your candidate doesn't win, you will Depends Donald Trump’s candidacy has been Probably not accept results Good for the party Bad for the party Not had much of an effect Accept results SUPPORTING: 86 11 2 CLINTON 39 41 16 63 27 7 TRUMP DEMOCRATIC VOTERS The Democratic Party is United Divided Importance that losing candidate publicly acknowledges the winner 73 25 Not at all Not too Hillary Clinton’s candidacy has been Very Somewhat SUPPORTING: Good for the party Bad for the party Not had much of an effect 77 15 6 2 CLINTON 46 17 35 36 31 12 19 TRUMP  Republican anger is directed not only at Mrs. Clinton or the electoral process. About as many Republican voters say Mr. Trump’s candidacy has been bad for the party as believe his campaign has been positive for Republicans, an extraordinary divide over their own standard-bearer on the eve of the election.  As Republicans face the possibility of their third consecutive presidential loss, their own voters overwhelmingly acknowledge the party is facing a schism: 85 percent of Republican voters said the party was divided, and only 14 percent said it was united.  But Republicans cannot even agree on who is to blame for the division, though they largely believe Mr. Trump has been the impetus for the breach, according to some follow-up interviews.  “I think Donald Trump has definitely divided the party,” said Sheila Wagner, 79, a Republican from Redmond, Wash. She said she had already marked her ballot for Mrs. Clinton, adding: “When he first declared he was going to run, I thought it was a joke. I just couldn’t believe anyone would favor him.”  Yet other Republicans point the finger at Republicans who have refused to support Mr. Trump.  “The old school, quote unquote, the Bushes, the people who have been around a long time, aren’t supporting Trump, and that’s creating division,” said Nora Reinhardt, 66, a farmer from Holt, Mo. “Some Republicans, because of comments Trump has made, which I grant are uncouth and certainly not politically correct, have found they can’t support him, although I think some of those people are coming around at this point.”  She said she was supporting Mr. Trump because she agreed with his policy positions.  Whatever their reasons, and despite how many of them think Mr. Trump has been detrimental to the party, more than eight in 10 Republican voters are falling in line behind their nominee.  The nationwide telephone poll was conducted with 1,333 registered voters from Oct. 28 to Nov. 1 on cellphones and landlines. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for all voters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  More than 22 million Americans had already cast their ballots when the poll was taken, and roughly one in five likely voters who participated said they had already voted.  National polling averages showed a growing lead for Mrs. Clinton in mid-October after the release of the “Access Hollywood” recording from 2005 in which Mr. Trump spoke crudely about women. As women from his past came out over the next weeks to accuse him of groping and forcibly kissing them, his poll numbers dipped.  Yet after a rough few weeks, enthusiasm among Mr. Trump’s supporters has rebounded: 52 percent now say they are very enthusiastic about voting. Enthusiasm among Mrs. Clinton’s supporters has been flat since September: 47 percent say they are very enthusiastic to vote.  Mrs. Clinton holds a 14-point advantage over her opponent among women, while Mr. Trump leads among men by 11 points. White women, who supported Republican candidates in the last three presidential elections, are now evenly split.  There is also a wide class divide: Mrs. Clinton has the support of 48 percent of whites with college degrees — a constituency that historically votes for a Republican presidential nominee — while Mr. Trump is backed by 41 percent from the same voters. But Mr. Trump receives 55 percent from whites without college degrees, while Mrs. Clinton captures just 30 percent from that group.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Majorities of voters say that Mr. Trump is not qualified to be president and that he lacks the temperament to serve in that office.  Last Friday, when the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, sent a letter to Congress about a renewed inquiry concerning Mrs. Clinton’s emails, Mr. Trump seized on the chance to shift campaign’s tenor and focus on the controversy over her handling of emails when she was secretary of state.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Times/CBS poll began hours after Mr. Comey’s letter became public. Most voters who were contacted said they had heard about the development. More voters said they were aware of accusations that Mr. Trump had made unwanted sexual advances toward several women.  Yet about six in 10 voters over all said the 11th-hour disclosures about each candidate would make no real difference in their votes. However, more people said the allegations about Mr. Trump were likely to negatively affect their votes than those who said the new email developments would discourage them from voting for Mrs. Clinton.  Four in 10 likely voters said Mr. Trump’s behavior toward women made them less likely to support him while fewer, one-third, said the newest development in the F.B.I. investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s emails had that effect.  Also bolstering Mrs. Clinton, and the possibility of a third straight Democratic term in the White House, is President Obama’s popularity. Fifty-two percent of registered voters approve of the job Mr. Obama is doing, an increase from earlier this year.  While Mr. Obama’s standing has increased, the campaign has taken a toll on Mrs. Clinton’s image. Only 32 percent of voters say she is honest and trustworthy, and a quarter of Democrats and nearly six in 10 independents do not think she will be able to unite the country if she wins.  “The campaign has gotten uglier and uglier,” said Michael Pappas, a real estate broker in Knoxville, Tenn., who is a Republican. “It’s been about mudslinging and attacking personalities instead of talking about issues, talking about how we can help our country move forward and succeed.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — Senator Jeff Flake was startled a few months ago when a constituent pressed him on whether he was willing to hold up any Supreme Court nominee chosen by Hillary Clinton if she was elected president.  “I asked for how long, and he said for four years,” Mr. Flake, an Arizona Republican, recounted in an interview. “I said no, of course not. That is not what I came to Washington to do.”  But that’s precisely what some of his Republican colleagues are considering. Having already blocked President Obama’s nominee to replace Justice Antonin Scalia since March, they contend that Republicans should indefinitely stall any nomination by Mrs. Clinton to prevent an ideological shift in the court. Such a blockade would represent a major escalation in the judicial wars that have been waged in the Senate since the 1980s.  Mr. Flake and other Republicans say that would be a terrible mistake. “You just can’t do that,” Mr. Flake said. “You shouldn’t and you can’t. People expect to have a full court.”  But if Mrs. Clinton prevails and Republicans hold the Senate, they are likely to come under immense pressure from conservative groups to do whatever is necessary to prevent her from filling seats on the court, considered by many Republicans as their last defense against the advance of liberal social and governmental policy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The idea of denying Mrs. Clinton a court pick has been quietly simmering in conservative circles as Republicans held firm in their refusal to take up the president’s nomination of Merrick B. Garland before the election. It burst into the open in recent weeks after Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who formerly tried to defuse judicial clashes, said that Republicans would stand united against any nominee chosen by Mrs. Clinton. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas followed that up with comments pointing to a precedent for extended vacancies on the court.  This week, Senator Richard M. Burr of North Carolina, who is in a tough re-election fight, was heard on a recording obtained by CNN promising to “do everything I can do to make sure four years from now, we still got an opening on the Supreme Court.”  The comments were a significant departure from the Republican Party’s public position that the court seat was being held open only to give voters a say in the choice through the election of a new president. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, has said repeatedly that filling the court vacancy should be left to the next president, not Mr. Obama.  Senator Susan Collins of Maine, who has met with Judge Garland and believes the party should have taken up his nomination, said pre-election tension could be playing a role in prompting the explosive comments.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Emotions are running really high now at this stage of the most bizarre presidential election of my lifetime,” she said. “After the election, I believe there will be a reassessment of how we should approach judicial nominees.”  Ms. Collins, who was part of the so-called Gang of 14 that in 2005 struck a deal that judges should not be blocked except under extraordinary circumstances, said the Senate should return to that standard.  “I certainly understand that the court has become much more ideological than is desirable for that institution, and that is why there are those who have taken what I believe to be an untenable view,” she said. “We don’t even know who her Supreme Court nominees are going to be, so how could we possibly draw a line in the sand? I certainly hope we don’t go down that route.”  Other senators with influence on judicial matters have sought to stave off the idea of a running blockade. Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who sits on the Judiciary Committee, joined in resisting hearings for Judge Garland, but he told me months ago that he had already warned his colleagues that he would be ready to back a nominee by Mrs. Clinton as long as the choice was qualified.  And Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Judiciary Committee chairman who has been pummeled by Democrats for refusing to set hearings on Judge Garland, indicated recently that he intended to act on the new president’s Supreme Court nomination. “If that new president happens to be Hillary, we can’t just simply stonewall,” he told a group of radio reporters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  If Democrats win the Senate and Mrs. Clinton becomes president, Republicans could try to block a nomination through a filibuster. But both parties fully expect that Democrats would quickly take procedural steps to deny Republicans the ability to do so, just as they did in 2013 when they lowered the threshold for breaking filibusters against most judicial nominees from 60 votes to a simple majority.  The Supreme Court was not included in that change because some senior Democrats feared the decision might backfire if it left them unable to block a future conservative choice they opposed. But after the Republican treatment of Judge Garland, Democrats would have little reluctance to force through the change now if Republicans carried out a Supreme Court filibuster.  Of course, this all becomes moot if Donald J. Trump is elected president and Republicans hold the Senate. Then it will be Democrats searching for ways to hold up Mr. Trump’s court choices.
After weeks of Mr. Trump’s accusations that the election is “rigged,” a little more than six in 10 of his supporters say they will accept the results as legitimate if he loses. More than a quarter of Mr. Trump’s supporters say they will probably not accept the outcome if Mrs. Clinton is declared the winner, and nearly 40 percent of them say they have little or no confidence that Americans’ votes will be counted properly.  The State of the Presidential Race Likely voters give their opinions on the election The State of the Presidential Race HORSE RACE AMONG LIKELY VOTERS 45 % HILLARY CLINTON 42 DONALD J. TRUMP 5 GARY JOHNSON 4 JILL STEIN VOTERS ASSESS THE ELECTION AND THEIR PARTIES AND CANDIDATES ALL VOTERS The 2016 campaign has made you feel more Excited Disgusted Neither 13 % 82 3 REPUBLICAN VOTERS The Republican Party is United Divided 14 85 Donald Trump’s candidacy has been Not had much of an effect Bad for the party Good for the party 39 41 16 DEMOCRATIC VOTERS The Democratic Party is United Divided 73 25 Hillary Clinton’s candidacy has been Not had much of an effect Bad for the party Good for the party 46 17 35 SHARP PARTISAN DIVIDE ON VOTE COUNT, FRAUD AND LEGITIMACY Confidence that the votes for president will be counted properly None Not much A lot Some SUPPORTING: 71 % 19 2 7 CLINTON 19 42 18 20 TRUMP Voter fraud in U.S. elections happens Sometimes A lot Not much Not at all SUPPORTING: 7 20 47 25 CLINTON 42 43 12 2 TRUMP If your candidate doesn't win, you will Depends Probably not accept results Accept results SUPPORTING: 86 11 2 CLINTON 63 27 7 TRUMP Importance that losing candidate publicly acknowledges the winner Not at all Not too Very Somewhat SUPPORTING: 77 15 6 2 CLINTON 36 31 12 19 TRUMP The State of the Presidential Race HORSE RACE AMONG LIKELY VOTERS SHARP PARTISAN DIVIDE ON VOTE COUNT, FRAUD AND LEGITIMACY 45 % HILLARY CLINTON Confidence that the votes for president will be counted properly 42 DONALD J. TRUMP None 5 GARY JOHNSON Not much A lot Some 4 JILL STEIN SUPPORTING: 71 % 19 2 7 CLINTON VOTERS ASSESS THE ELECTION AND THEIR PARTIES AND CANDIDATES 19 42 18 20 TRUMP ALL VOTERS The 2016 campaign has made you feel more Voter fraud in U.S. elections happens Excited Disgusted Neither Sometimes 13 % 82 3 A lot Not much Not at all SUPPORTING: REPUBLICAN VOTERS 7 20 47 25 CLINTON The Republican Party is 42 43 12 2 TRUMP United Divided 14 85 If your candidate doesn't win, you will Depends Donald Trump’s candidacy has been Probably not accept results Good for the party Bad for the party Not had much of an effect Accept results SUPPORTING: 86 11 2 CLINTON 39 41 16 63 27 7 TRUMP DEMOCRATIC VOTERS The Democratic Party is United Divided Importance that losing candidate publicly acknowledges the winner 73 25 Not at all Not too Hillary Clinton’s candidacy has been Very Somewhat SUPPORTING: Good for the party Bad for the party Not had much of an effect 77 15 6 2 CLINTON 46 17 35 36 31 12 19 TRUMP  Republican anger is directed not only at Mrs. Clinton or the electoral process. About as many Republican voters say Mr. Trump’s candidacy has been bad for the party as believe his campaign has been positive for Republicans, an extraordinary divide over their own standard-bearer on the eve of the election.  As Republicans face the possibility of their third consecutive presidential loss, their own voters overwhelmingly acknowledge the party is facing a schism: 85 percent of Republican voters said the party was divided, and only 14 percent said it was united.  But Republicans cannot even agree on who is to blame for the division, though they largely believe Mr. Trump has been the impetus for the breach, according to some follow-up interviews.  “I think Donald Trump has definitely divided the party,” said Sheila Wagner, 79, a Republican from Redmond, Wash. She said she had already marked her ballot for Mrs. Clinton, adding: “When he first declared he was going to run, I thought it was a joke. I just couldn’t believe anyone would favor him.”  Yet other Republicans point the finger at Republicans who have refused to support Mr. Trump.  “The old school, quote unquote, the Bushes, the people who have been around a long time, aren’t supporting Trump, and that’s creating division,” said Nora Reinhardt, 66, a farmer from Holt, Mo. “Some Republicans, because of comments Trump has made, which I grant are uncouth and certainly not politically correct, have found they can’t support him, although I think some of those people are coming around at this point.”  She said she was supporting Mr. Trump because she agreed with his policy positions.  Whatever their reasons, and despite how many of them think Mr. Trump has been detrimental to the party, more than eight in 10 Republican voters are falling in line behind their nominee.  The nationwide telephone poll was conducted with 1,333 registered voters from Oct. 28 to Nov. 1 on cellphones and landlines. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for all voters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  More than 22 million Americans had already cast their ballots when the poll was taken, and roughly one in five likely voters who participated said they had already voted.  National polling averages showed a growing lead for Mrs. Clinton in mid-October after the release of the “Access Hollywood” recording from 2005 in which Mr. Trump spoke crudely about women. As women from his past came out over the next weeks to accuse him of groping and forcibly kissing them, his poll numbers dipped.  Yet after a rough few weeks, enthusiasm among Mr. Trump’s supporters has rebounded: 52 percent now say they are very enthusiastic about voting. Enthusiasm among Mrs. Clinton’s supporters has been flat since September: 47 percent say they are very enthusiastic to vote.  Mrs. Clinton holds a 14-point advantage over her opponent among women, while Mr. Trump leads among men by 11 points. White women, who supported Republican candidates in the last three presidential elections, are now evenly split.  There is also a wide class divide: Mrs. Clinton has the support of 48 percent of whites with college degrees — a constituency that historically votes for a Republican presidential nominee — while Mr. Trump is backed by 41 percent from the same voters. But Mr. Trump receives 55 percent from whites without college degrees, while Mrs. Clinton captures just 30 percent from that group.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Majorities of voters say that Mr. Trump is not qualified to be president and that he lacks the temperament to serve in that office.  Last Friday, when the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, sent a letter to Congress about a renewed inquiry concerning Mrs. Clinton’s emails, Mr. Trump seized on the chance to shift campaign’s tenor and focus on the controversy over her handling of emails when she was secretary of state.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Times/CBS poll began hours after Mr. Comey’s letter became public. Most voters who were contacted said they had heard about the development. More voters said they were aware of accusations that Mr. Trump had made unwanted sexual advances toward several women.  Yet about six in 10 voters over all said the 11th-hour disclosures about each candidate would make no real difference in their votes. However, more people said the allegations about Mr. Trump were likely to negatively affect their votes than those who said the new email developments would discourage them from voting for Mrs. Clinton.  Four in 10 likely voters said Mr. Trump’s behavior toward women made them less likely to support him while fewer, one-third, said the newest development in the F.B.I. investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s emails had that effect.  Also bolstering Mrs. Clinton, and the possibility of a third straight Democratic term in the White House, is President Obama’s popularity. Fifty-two percent of registered voters approve of the job Mr. Obama is doing, an increase from earlier this year.  While Mr. Obama’s standing has increased, the campaign has taken a toll on Mrs. Clinton’s image. Only 32 percent of voters say she is honest and trustworthy, and a quarter of Democrats and nearly six in 10 independents do not think she will be able to unite the country if she wins.  “The campaign has gotten uglier and uglier,” said Michael Pappas, a real estate broker in Knoxville, Tenn., who is a Republican. “It’s been about mudslinging and attacking personalities instead of talking about issues, talking about how we can help our country move forward and succeed.”
Photo  Donald J. Trump held a surprise news conference shortly before the second presidential debate on Sunday with three women who have accused Bill Clinton of sexual assault or sexual harassment in the past.  A fourth woman who was raped by a man Hillary Clinton defended at trial in 1975 also appeared on the impromptu panel, which Mr. Trump billed as the end of debate preparations and broadcast via Facebook Live.  The four women were Paula Jones, Kathy Shelton, Juanita Broaddrick and Kathleen Willey. Here is a brief guide to the accusations each woman has made against Bill and Hillary Clinton.  Paula Jones  Ms. Jones is a former Arkansas state employee who sued Mr. Clinton for sexual harassment in 1994. She claimed that he exposed himself to her and propositioned her in a hotel room in 1991 when he was governor.  Ms. Jones’s lawsuit led to Mr. Clinton’s impeachment in 1998 because it was during a deposition in that case that he first denied having had sexual relations with the White House intern Monica Lewinsky.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit in 1998. Ms. Jones appealed that ruling, and the next year Mr. Clinton settled the suit for $850,000. As part of the settlement, he did not admit to any wrongdoing and did not apologize.  On Sunday, Ms. Jones responded angrily to a reporter who asked Mr. Trump if his star power entitled him to grope women without their consent. “Why don’t you ask Bill Clinton that?” she said. “Why don’t you go ask Bill Clinton that? Why don’t you ask Hillary as well?”  Kathy Shelton  When she was 12, Ms. Shelton alleged that she had been raped by Thomas Alfred Taylor, a 41-year-old man. Mrs. Clinton defended Mr. Taylor in his 1975 trial when she was a professor and a lawyer with the University of Arkansas Law School Legal Aid Clinic.  In a 2014 CNN interview, Mahlon Gibson, the attorney who prosecuted Mr. Taylor, said that Mrs. Clinton had been assigned the case and tried to get out of defending Mr. Taylor, a request that was denied by the judge, Maupin Cummings. “She got appointed to represent this guy,” Mr. Gibson said.  Mrs. Clinton succeeded in getting a plea deal for Mr. Taylor. He was charged with “unlawful fondling of a child under the age of 14” and sentenced to one year in a county jail and four years of probation. In 2014, The Washington Free Beacon published an audio recording in which Mrs. Clinton could be heard chuckling about Mr. Taylor’s case.  On Sunday, Ms. Shelton said that “at 12 years old, Hillary put me through something that you would never put a 12-year-old through” and accused her of “laughing on tape saying she knows they did it.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Juanita Broaddrick  In 1999, Ms. Broaddrick, a volunteer in Mr. Clinton’s first gubernatorial campaign, accused him of raping her in an Arkansas hotel room in 1978, recanting an affidavit that she had signed the previous year in which she said the episode had not taken place. She was referenced in Ms. Jones’s sexual harassment lawsuit as Jane Doe No. 5.  On Sunday morning, Mr. Trump tweeted a link to an interview Ms. Broaddrick gave to the conservative news website Breitbart in which she repeated her accusations against Mr. Clinton and accused Mrs. Clinton of enabling her husband’s behavior.  Ms. Broaddrick repeated her accusations against the Clintons at Mr. Trump’s hastily arranged news conference on Sunday night, defending him against the maelstrom of criticism caused by the release of a recording on which he could be heard talking about women in vulgar sexual terms.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I tweeted recently, and Mr. Trump retweeted it, that actions speak louder than words,” Ms. Broaddrick said. “Mr. Trump may have said some bad words, but Bill Clinton raped me and Hillary Clinton threatened me. I don’t think there is any comparison.”  Kathleen Willey  Ms. Willey is a former White House volunteer who claimed Mr. Clinton made a “very forceful” sexual advance against her in his office in November 1993 when she met with him to seek a job.  On Sunday, Ms. Willey said that she was a supporter of Mr. Trump’s campaign and that she believed in his campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again.”  “And I cried when he said that because I think that this is the greatest country in the world,” she said. “I think that we can do anything. I think we can accomplish anything. I think we can bring peace to this world, and I think Donald Trump can lead us to that point.”
Mr. Christie will become a vice chairman of the transition effort, the campaign said.  The new inner circle at the transition offices will direct the activities of dozens of corporate consultants, lobbyists and other specialists who will be responsible for recommending candidates for agency jobs across the breadth of the federal government. Some of those advisers come from industries for which they are now in charge of finding top regulators.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The mission of our team will be clear: put together the most highly qualified group of successful leaders who will be able to implement our change agenda in Washington,” the transition team announced Friday afternoon.  The surprise moves will sideline Mr. Christie, who had been in charge of the transition for several months. After Mr. Christie dropped out of the Republican primary race, he became a staunch supporter of Mr. Trump. But his standing has fallen recently as two former aides were convicted in the scandal involving the closing of access lanes at the George Washington Bridge in 2013.  In a statement, Mr. Christie said that he is “proud to have run the pre-election phase of the transition team” and said that he looks forward to working with Mr. Pence. “I want to thank President-elect Trump for the opportunity to continue to help lead in this next phase,” Mr. Christie wrote.  Photo  Two people familiar with the reorganization discussion said Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, had wanted to marginalize Mr. Christie, who had come to recognize that he was not in the running to serve as a top adviser in Mr. Trump’s White House. It was unclear whether concerns about his ability to be confirmed might prevent him from being offered a cabinet post.  The changes will also push aside Richard H. Bagger, a former top aide to Mr. Christie who had been working on the transition. The transition team said Mr. Bagger will “return to the private sector” but will remain an adviser.  Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who has been a top campaign supporter, will also serve as vice chairmen of the transition, the transition team said Friday afternoon.  The 16-member advisory committee is made up of four women and 12 men. It will include several members of Congress; Rebekah Mercer, a top Republican donor; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; Peter Thiel, a founder of PayPal; Attorney General Pam Bondi of Florida; Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs executive; and Anthony Scaramucci, a hedge-fund manager and Trump supporter. Mr. Bannon will also serve on the committee. A political committee supporting Ms. Bondi received a $25,000 donation from the Trump Foundation, raising questions because it was around the time her office was reviewing allegations against Mr. Trump’s for-profit education programs.  “This team of experienced leaders will form the building blocks of our presidential transition team staff leadership roster, and will work with elected officials and tireless volunteers to prepare our government for the transfer of power on Jan. 20,” Mr. Pence said in a statement.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  There are some indications that the transition effort was slow to start, perhaps the result of Mr. Trump’s upset victory, which caught much of the political world by surprise. At least a few of the people helping organize the search for Mr. Trump were tapped at the last minute, while others have been preparing quietly for weeks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the Pentagon and the State Department, officials of the Obama administration said on Thursday that they had not yet heard from Mr. Trump’s transition team about beginning the complex work of transferring responsibilities and authority. A spokesman for the State Department said he did not have “any firm word” on when briefings might begin for designated officials from the new government.  Several people briefed on the transition process described it as somewhat chaotic after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday. His campaign was led by four leadership teams over 18 months, and most of those people were back in view on Thursday, including Corey Lewandowski, the campaign’s first manager. Mr. Lewandowski is said to have told people he would prefer a White House senior adviser role, although he has also been mentioned as a possible Republican National Committee chairman. Mr. Lewandowski resigned on Friday from his role as a CNN political commentator.  Photo  One thing is clear already: those helping Mr. Trump make the decisions are the members of his campaign’s inner circle. On Friday morning at Trump Tower in Manhattan, the president-elect’s closest aides arrived, one by one, waving to the press corps as they entered the elevators.  Trump Tower, the president-elect’s residence, has been transformed into a kind of fortress by the Secret Service and the New York police. The building has been ringed by Jersey barriers and concrete blocks marked with “NYPD.” The Secret Service has set up checkpoints on each end of 56th Street near the tower, and pedestrian access has been restricted around the building.  With just about 70 days left before the inauguration, Mr. Trump’s administration is largely being assembled behind the scenes. But like much else in the nation’s capital, little stays secret for long.  The list of names being mentioned as possibilities for crucial posts in Mr. Trump’s cabinet is growing by the hour, giving official Washington what it craves most: a never-ending parlor game as speculation grows about who might actually get a nod.  The latest to be swept into the speculation is Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, who was mentioned as a possible candidate for secretary of the Treasury by CNBC. Officials with the Trump transition team said they reached out informally to Mr. Dimon, who was clear he did not want the post.  Aides to Mr. Trump have declined to confirm who is on the short list for cabinet posts. And despite the president-elect’s return to Twitter on Thursday night, he has so far said nothing specific about his possible picks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The critical position of chief of staff — the gatekeeper for the president inside the West Wing — is expected to come down to a choice between Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus. The two men spent more than an hour in a meeting on Friday at Trump Tower.  Mr. Giuliani told CNN on Thursday that he might accept an appointment as attorney general, saying that “there’s probably nobody that knows the Justice Department better than me.”  Mr. Mnuchin, who served as Mr. Trump’s campaign finance chairman, is said to be a serious contender for Treasury secretary (though Carl Icahn, the investor, and Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, have also been mentioned in the news media).
Photo  President-elect Donald J. Trump won the White House with an outsider’s populist promise to “drain the swamp” of Washington.  Now, as he prepares to assume the presidency, an open question remains about the capital he repeatedly spurned: Just how much is he willing to become a part of it?  Mr. Trump, a homebody who often flew several hours late at night during the campaign so he could wake up in his own bed in Trump Tower, is talking with his advisers about how many nights a week he will spend in the White House. He has told them he would like to do what he is used to, which is spending time in New York when he can.  The future first lady, Melania Trump, expects to move to Washington. But the couple’s 10-year-old son, Barron, is midway through a school year in New York, and it is unclear when the move would happen.  The questions reflect what Mr. Trump’s advisers described as the president-elect’s coming to grips with the fact that his life is about to change radically. They say that Mr. Trump, who was shocked when he won the election, might spend most of the week in Washington, much like members of Congress, and return to Trump Tower or his golf course in Bedminster, N.J., or his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach on weekends.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Hanging on to the familiar for presidents-elect and their families is not unusual. There were early questions about whether Michelle Obama would leave Chicago and move to the White House in early 2009 and disrupt her daughters’ school years, but the whole family moved in the day of the inaugural. Mr. Trump’s advisers hold out the possibility that the president-elect may spend more time in the White House as he grows less overwhelmed and more comfortable in the job.  Still, Mr. Trump has spent the last three decades, for the most part, cosseted within Trump Tower. His apartment is on the 58th floor, and a designated elevator takes him from there to his office on the 26th floor.  He wakes at 5 o’clock most mornings, reads The New York Post, The New York Times and a handful of other newspapers, and tunes into the morning television news shows. In the final months of the campaign, he would hang around his apartment until about 10 a.m., joining his aides in the office later.  Mr. Trump’s affection for his penthouse apartment runs deep, as his biographer, Michael D’Antonio, learned when Mr. Trump invited him inside the three-story unit in 2014 for an extended interview.  Photo  Mr. Trump reveled in recalling the challenges required to design and build the apartment, decorated in 24-karat gold and marble in the Louis XIV style, saying he simply wanted to see if such an ambitious undertaking could be accomplished. He described it less as a home than a tribute to his own self-image.  “I really wanted to see if it could be done,” Mr. Trump said at the time, as he showed Mr. D’Antonio around the apartment. “This is a very complex unit. Building this unit, if you look at the columns and the carvings, this building, this unit was harder than building the building itself.”  Yet after meeting with President Obama on Thursday and touring the White House, Mr. Trump, according to two people briefed on his thinking, was taken with that building over all and marveled at the neoclassical architecture and history.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Returning home to Trump Tower from the White House may not be Mr. Trump’s only embrace of the familiar. His aides say he has also expressed interest in continuing to hold the large rallies that were a staple of his candidacy. He likes the instant gratification and adulation that the cheering crowds provide, and his aides are discussing how they might accommodate his demand.  “I think Trump has discovered that these rallies are tremendous opportunities for him to get his message out,” said Christopher Ruddy, chief executive of Newsmax Media, a conservative website. “It’s actually sort of old-fashioned, that you want to actually meet people and press the flesh with him.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Not least, Mr. Trump is finding Twitter a familiar comfort, although it is unclear if he will be the first president to wholly control his own Twitter account once he is in the White House. “I know they’re willing to be unorthodox and want to be true to themselves and not fall into a habit of let’s just follow precedent on what’s been done,” said Mike DuHaime, an adviser to Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who supported Mr. Trump shortly after ending his own White House bid and who stepped back as the head of the president-elect’s transition team on Friday.  Mr. Trump’s aides got him to agree to restrict his use of Twitter in the waning days of his campaign, but on Thursday, his second day as president-elect, Mr. Trump posted the kind of Twitter missive for which he has become known: a message complaining that “professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting.”  “Very unfair!” he wrote.  Mr. Trump checked himself later when he offered a more unifying message: “Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country. We will all come together and be proud.”  For now Mr. Trump remains in Trump Tower receiving congratulations, thanking those who stayed with him and venting to associates his lingering grievances with the news media over coverage of the campaign. He has stayed in touch with reporters at Fox News, checking in to ask about ratings and, as he has done for months, polling people about whom he should put in top jobs.  One constant is that the small cadre of aides and advisers who signed on with the campaign in its early, long-shot days will probably have jobs in the administration, should they want them. They have been told that all of the campaign staff will be taken care of.  “It was such a small operation and it’s such a big government, so it’s very natural they’re going to look to the people who went with them early and stuck with them through thick and thin,” Mr. DuHaime said.
Her campaign said the seemingly positive outcome had only hurt it with voters who did not trust Mrs. Clinton and were receptive to Mr. Trump’s claims of a “rigged system.” In particular, white suburban women who had been on the fence were reminded of the email imbroglio and broke decidedly in Mr. Trump’s favor, aides said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After leading in polls in many battleground states, Mrs. Clinton told the donors on Saturday, “we dropped, and we had to keep really pushing to regain our advantage, which going into last weekend we had.”  “We were once again up in all but two of the battleground states, and we were up considerably in some that we ended up losing,” Mrs. Clinton said. “And we were feeling like we had to put it back together.”  Presidential candidates have a long history of blaming forces outside their control for their losses. In 2004, John Kerry linked his defeat to a videotape of Osama bin Laden that appeared days before the election, stoking fears about terrorism. In 2012, Mitt Romney told donors he had lost because President Obama had vowed to bestow “gifts” on Democratic special interests groups, namely African-Americans, Hispanics and young people.  Mrs. Clinton’s contention appears to be more rooted in reality — and hard data. An internal campaign memo with polling data said that “there is no question that a week from Election Day, Secretary Clinton was poised for a historic win,” but that, in the end, “late-breaking developments in the race proved one hurdle too many for us to overcome.”  Mrs. Clinton lost narrowly in several battleground states, and by the time all ballots are counted, she appears poised to win the popular vote by more than two million votes.  Still, Mrs. Clinton’s instinct to shun any personal responsibility angered some Democrats. Several donors on the call, while deeply bitter about Mr. Comey’s actions, said they believed that Mrs. Clinton and her campaign had suffered avoidable missteps that handed the election to an unacceptable opponent. They pointed to the campaign’s lack of a compelling message for white working-class voters and to decisions years ago by Mrs. Clinton to use a private email address at the State Department and to accept millions of dollars for speeches to Wall Street.  “There is a special place in hell for Clinton staff, allegedly including Cheryl Mills, that okayed the email server setup,” Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist and former senior aide to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, wrote on Sidewire, a social media site, referring to a longtime aide and lawyer to Mrs. Clinton.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign was so confident in her victory that her aides popped open Champagne on the campaign plane early Tuesday. But that conviction, aides would later learn, was based largely on erroneous data showing that young, black and Latino voters and suburban women who had been turned off by Mr. Trump’s comments but viewed Mrs. Clinton unfavorably would turn out for her in higher numbers than they ultimately did.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Exit polls conducted by Edison Research found that among people who said they had decided in the final week before Election Day, 47 percent voted for Mr. Trump and 42 percent for Mrs. Clinton.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As early as Wednesday morning, aides began to explain to Democrats shaken by the loss that the campaign’s sophisticated data modeling had not taken into account the bombshell F.B.I. announcement.  Mr. Comey’s letters to Congress went against the F.B.I.’s longstanding tradition of avoiding decisions that could affect elections, but he told aides that he felt he had no choice because he had already weighed in on the case so publicly. In July, he had taken the unusual step of publicly announcing that the F.B.I. would not charge Mrs. Clinton.  At the time, she believed she had finally put the issue to rest. And after the final debate on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, she emerged in such a strong position that she began to focus on campaigning for down-ballot Democrats and planned a campaign stop in traditionally Republican Arizona.  “We felt so good about where we were,” Mrs. Clinton told donors. Before Mr. Comey’s first letter to Congress, she added, “we just had a real wind at our back.”  Mr. Trump seized on the letter, telling voters in Nevada the Saturday before Election Day that “the F.B.I. has reopened its criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton,” and that the matter “would grind government to a halt” should Mrs. Clinton win the White House. The F.B.I.’s examination of the new emails did not in fact reopen the investigation.  Democratic pollsters attributed Mr. Trump’s laser-thin victories in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin — states that President Obama had won — largely to a drifting of college-educated suburban women to the Republican nominee at the last minute, because of the renewed focus on Mrs. Clinton’s email server.  “We lost with college-educated whites after leading with them all summer,” a Clinton spokesman, Brian Fallon, said on Wednesday. “Five more days of reminders about Comey, and they gravitated back to Trump.”  Before Mrs. Clinton spoke on Saturday, her finance director, Dennis Cheng, thanked the donors on the call, each of whom had raised at least $100,000. The campaign brought in nearly $1 billion to spend heavily on data efforts, to disperse hundreds of staff members to battleground states, and to air television advertisements — only to fall short to Mr. Trump’s upstart operation.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Donors conceded that, ultimately, no amount of money could match Mr. Trump’s crisp pitch, aimed at the economically downtrodden, to “make America great again.”  “You can have the greatest field program, and we did — he had nothing,” said Jay S. Jacobs, a prominent New York Democrat and donor to Mrs. Clinton. “You can have better ads, paid for by greater funds, and we did. Unfortunately, Trump had the winning argument.”  Mrs. Clinton has kept a low profile since her concession speech at a Midtown Manhattan hotel on Wednesday. On Thursday, a young mother with her 13-month-old daughter spotted Mrs. Clinton walking her dogs near her home in Chappaqua, N.Y., posting a photo of the defeated candidate on Facebook that quickly went viral along with the hashtag #ImStillWithHer.  On Friday night, Mrs. Clinton thanked volunteers on a nationwide conference call. “Look, I’m not going to sugarcoat it,” she said, sighing. “These have been very, very tough days.”
Mr. Trump made the comments to The Wall Street Journal in his first interview since winning the election. The newspaper said Mr. Obama had urged the president-elect to reconsider repealing his signature health care law, which Mr. Trump said had become “unworkable.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But in the interview, Mr. Trump said he told the president that he would consider keeping two provisions of the law: the prohibition against insurers denying coverage because of a patient’s pre-existing condition; and the one that allows parents to keep their children on their insurance plans until they turn 26.  The problem: Without a mandate for everyone to buy health insurance, the popular pre-existing condition provision could send insurance companies into a tailspin, because their costs would rise with sicker customers, and that would not be offset by healthy consumers forced to buy insurance.  ‘A lovely call’ from Clinton.  Mr. Trump said in an interview to be shown on “60 Minutes” Sunday that Mrs. Clinton “couldn’t have been nicer” in a congratulatory call she made to concede the election, and that Bill Clinton had complimented him on “one of the most amazing” presidential runs he had ever seen.  “It was a lovely call, and it was a tough call for her — I mean, I can imagine, tougher for her than it would have been for me,” Mr. Trump said. “She couldn’t have been nicer. She just said, ‘Congratulations, Donald, well done.’”  Mr. Trump, who on Thursday said he would seek Mr. Obama’s counsel about the presidency, said he would consider asking for Mr. Clinton’s as well.  Mr. Trump also promised that there would be no lapse in health insurance for millions of Americans covered under the Affordable Care Act when he repeals and replaces the law.  “We’re going to do it simultaneously — it’ll be just fine,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s what I do. I do a good job. You know, I mean, I know how to do this stuff. We’re going to repeal it and replace it. And we’re not going to have, like, a two-day period and we’re not going to have a two-year period where there’s nothing.”  And speaking of olive branches — Mitt Romney  Mr. Trump has quietly reached out to Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee who took an impassioned stand against Mr. Trump during the campaign.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The call came after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday night, according to two people briefed on it, although it was unclear how it went and what was said.  Aides to Mr. Trump and Mr. Romney did not respond to requests for comment.  Gloria Allred eyes the Paula Jones model.  With her eye on the right’s Paula Jones legal crusade of the 1990s, Gloria Allred, the civil rights lawyer representing women who have accused Mr. Trump of sexual assault, is trying to lure the president-elect into a legal battle before he takes office.  Ms. Allred challenged Mr. Trump on Friday to retract his threat to sue his accusers for defaming him and suggested that she might bring a case against him if he refused. She also said that she was prepared to countersue if Mr. Trump made good on the threat.  “President-elect Trump now has the opportunity to act presidential,” Ms. Allred said at a news conference with Summer Zervos, the former contestant on “The Apprentice” who said last month that Mr. Trump tried to seduce her and grabbed her breasts in 2007.  Ms. Allred cited a precedent for suing a sitting president: Ms. Jones.  “Obviously the lawsuit against President Clinton by Paula Jones did proceed while he was in office for actions that were alleged to take place prior to his becoming president,” she said.  The Jones case forced Mr. Clinton into a deposition that resulted in his impeachment on charges of lying under oath about an affair with an intern.  A sobbing Ms. Zervos sat next to Ms. Allred and offered her own solution: “What happened to a good, old-fashioned I’m sorry?”  Mike Pence is in, Chris Christie is out.  Vice President-elect Mike Pence will take the lead on the president-elect’s transition.  Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who is under a cloud after two aides were convicted of conspiring to shut down traffic on the George Washington Bridge in the so-called Bridgegate scandal, moves aside.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump told advisers that he wanted Mr. Pence’s Washington experience and contacts. An executive committee, which will include members of Congress, will advise Mr. Pence as the process moves forward.  See the full story.  Corey Lewandowski is out at CNN, and (unofficially) back in with Trump.  Corey Lewandowski, who was fired as Mr. Trump’s campaign manager and then went to work for CNN, even as he continued to consult with the campaign, resigned Friday from his political commentator role, the network confirmed.  Photo  Mr. Lewandowski is expected to take a position in the Trump administration.  He was seen in Trump Tower on Wednesday immediately after Mr. Trump’s victory, chatting with senior aides and attending meetings. Mr. Lewandowski did not return calls for comment.  Mr. Lewandowski was viewed as a controversial appointment by the network; he had signed a nondisclosure agreement with Mr. Trump that prevented him from criticizing the candidate publicly, and he was still being paid by the campaign while working for CNN.  Chuck Schumer backs Keith Ellison to head of the D.N.C.  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the incoming Democratic leader, threw his weight behind Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota on Friday to be the new chairman of the Democratic National Committee, the clearest sign yet that, in defeat, the party will move to the left.  After losing the working-class Rust Belt to Mr. Trump, Democrats could have recruited an industrial-region populist like Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, who represents the Youngstown area. But Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont quickly backed Mr. Ellison, who is black, Muslim and an ardent progressive.  Two former governors, Howard Dean of Vermont and Martin O’Malley of Maryland, also expressed interest Friday in being the party’s new committee chairman.  Photo  Million Woman March brewing  So much for a warm welcome to Washington.  Groups on social media are trying to coordinate a Million Woman March the day after Mr. Trump’s inauguration in protest of the new president. The march will go from the Lincoln Memorial to the White House on Jan. 21 to show “strength, power and courage.” Men are also encouraged to attend.  “No woman is free unless all women are free,” the organizers of the march wrote on the Facebook page where it is being organized.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  State groups for the march have already been formed for people to coordinate travel to the capital. However, some fear that the idea could become a logistical nightmare coming so close to Inauguration Day because of the lack of hotel rooms and the potential for clashes with Trump supporters  Where will Trump live?  Among the president-elect’s most pressing questions as he prepares to take office is where he should live.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump, a provincial homebody who divides his time among golf courses in Florida and New Jersey and his townhouse apartment in Manhattan, is weighing how much time to spend in Washington, according to two people familiar with his deliberations.  One option is spending weekends in New York and most of the week in Washington. Mr. Trump’s wife, Melania, is ultimately planning to move to Washington, according to one person briefed on the discussions, but their 10-year-old son, Barron, is still in school.  Trump’s problems with women continue.  Mr. Trump may be triumphant, but Gloria Allred isn’t done with him yet.  More than 10 women accused Mr. Trump of sexual assault after a video bragging about his groping habits emerged last month. Ms. Allred, the lawyer who has been working with many of the women, does not appear to be letting the president-elect off the hook.  At 2:30 p.m. Eastern time on Friday, she said that she was going to issue a challenge to Mr. Trump at a news conference with one of his accusers who has already come out publicly to tell her story. Ms. Allred would not reveal the name of the woman before the event or share any details of the challenge.  Before the election, Mr. Trump said that the accusers were all lying and that he might sue them. Ms. Allred told ABC News on Thursday that her clients had no plans to sue Mr. Trump at this point, but that they would countersue if he did so.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Harry Reid weighs in.  Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the departing Democratic leader, added his voice to the postelection statements on the president-elect. Unlike most Democrats, he gave no quarter:  The election of Donald Trump has emboldened the forces of hate and bigotry in America. White nationalists, Vladimir Putin and ISIS are celebrating Donald Trump’s victory, while innocent, law-abiding Americans are wracked with fear — especially African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, Muslim Americans, L.G.B.T. Americans and Asian-Americans. Watching white nationalists celebrate while innocent Americans cry tears of fear does not feel like America.  Bernie Sanders to protesters: Chill.  Photo  Some of the anti-Trump protesters who have taken to the streets this week are supporters of Mr. Sanders, and on Friday the former Democratic presidential candidate reminded them that creating chaos and disorder should not be their goal.  Security is beefed up around Fortress Trump.  Trump Tower, the skyscraper on Fifth Avenue and the home base of the president-elect, has become a fortress in the wake of the election.  The lobby, designated a public space by the City of New York, was closed off on Friday morning as Mr. Trump met with advisers. A large police presence surrounded the building.  The tower was built with a special permit more than 30 years ago. The city granted Mr. Trump extra space in exchange for maintaining public access to the lobby.  Peter Thiel joins the transition.  Peter Thiel, the Silicon Valley libertarian who secretly financed a lawsuit against the website Gawker, was named a member of the Presidential Transition Team Executive Committee on Friday afternoon.
Mr. Trump was swept to power in large part by white working-class voters who responded to his vow to restore the voices of forgotten people, ones drowned out by big business and Wall Street. But in his transition to power, some of the most prominent voices will be those of advisers who come from the same industries for which they are being asked to help set the regulatory groundwork.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The president-elect’s spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, declined a request for comment, as did nearly a dozen corporate executives, consultants and lobbyists serving on his transition team, which was outlined in a list distributed widely in Washington on Thursday.  A number of the people on that list are well-established experts with no clear interest in helping private-sector clients. But to critics of Mr. Trump — both Democrats and Republicans — the inclusion of advisers with industry ties is a first sign that he may not follow through on all of his promises.  “This whole idea that he was an outsider and going to destroy the political establishment and drain the swamp were the lines of a con man, and guess what — he is being exposed as just that,” said Peter Wehner, who served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush before becoming a speechwriter for George W. Bush. “He is failing the first test, and he should be held accountable for it.”  Transition teams help new presidents pick the new cabinet, as well as up to 4,000 political appointees who will take over top posts in agencies across the government. President Obama, after he was first elected, instituted rules that prohibited individuals who had served as registered lobbyists in the prior year from serving as transition advisers in the areas in which they represented private clients. They were also prohibited, after the administration took power, from lobbying in the parts of the government they helped set up.  “They wanted to make sure that people were not putting their thumb on the scale, or even the perception of that,” said Martha Joynt Kumar, the director of a nonprofit group called the White House Transition Project, which has studied two decades of presidential transitions.  Among the advisers assisting Mr. Trump who have no clear private-sector ties are Brian Johnson, a top lawyer for the House Financial Services Committee, who is helping to pick top staff members for the federal government’s many financial services agencies.  Edwin Meese III, who served as attorney general under Mr. Reagan and is now associated with the Heritage Foundation, the conservative think tank, is helping oversee management and budget issues, along with Kay Coles James, a Bush administration official who now runs an institute that trains future African-American leaders.  Former Representative Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan, who served as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and was once a special agent in the F.B.I., is overseeing issues related to national security, including the intelligence agencies and the Department of Homeland Security.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But in other areas, most notably the energy sector, the transition team advisers are far from independent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Catanzaro’s client list is a who’s who of major corporate players — such as the Hess Corporation and Devon Energy — that have tried to challenge the Obama administration’s environmental and energy policies on issues such as how much methane gas can be released at oil and gas drilling sites, lobbying disclosure reports show.  He also worked with oil industry players to help push through major legislation goals, such as allowing the export of crude oil. He will now help pick Mr. Trump’s energy team.  Michael McKenna, another lobbyist helping to pick key administration officials who will oversee energy policy, has a client list that this year has included the Southern Company, one of the most vocal critics of efforts to prevent climate change by putting limits on emissions from coal-burning power plants.  Advisers with ties to other industries include Martin Whitmer, who is overseeing “transportation and infrastructure” for the Trump transition. He is the chairman of a Washington law firm whose lobbying clients include the Association of American Railroads and the National Asphalt Pavement Association.  David Malpass, the former chief economist at Bear Stearns, the Wall Street investment bank that collapsed during the 2008 financial crisis, is overseeing the “economic issues” portfolio of the transition, as well as operations at the Treasury Department. Mr. Malpass now runs a firm called Encima Global, which sells economic research to institutional investors and corporate clients.  Mr. Eisenach, as a telecom industry consultant, has worked to help major cellular companies fight back against regulations proposed by the F.C.C. that would mandate so-called net neutrality — requiring providers to give equal access to their networks to outside companies. He is now helping to oversee the rebuilding of the staff at the F.C.C.  Dan DiMicco, a former chief executive of the steelmaking company Nucor, who now serves on the board of directors of Duke Energy, is heading the transition team for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. Mr. DiMicco has long argued that China is unfairly subsidizing its manufacturing sector at the expense of American jobs.  In his campaign, Mr. Trump promised to take steps to close the so-called revolving door, through which government officials leave their posts and then personally profit by helping private companies reap rewards from policies or programs they had recently managed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In October, declaring that “it’s time to drain the swamp in Washington,” he promised to institute a five-year ban in which all executive branch officials would be prevented from lobbying the government after they left. He has also promised to expand the definition of a lobbyist, so it includes corporate consultants who do not register as lobbyists but still often act like one.  Bruce F. Freed, the president of a nonprofit group called the Center for Political Accountability, which is pressing major corporations to be more transparent about their political spending, said Mr. Trump’s transition team had sent an unfortunate signal to his followers.  “This is one of the reasons you had such anger among voters — people rigging the system, gaming the system,” Mr. Freed said. “This represents more of the same.”
Exit polls for 2010 will be available when all polls close in this race.  Methodology  Data for 2016 were collected by Edison Research for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, The Associated Press, CBSNews, CNN, Fox News and NBC News. The voter survey is based on questionnaires completed by 24,537 voters leaving 350 voting places throughout the United States on Election Day including 4,398 telephone interviews with early and absentee voters.  In 2012, 2008 and 2004, the exit poll was conducted by Edison/Mitofsky; in 1996 and 2000 by Voter News Services; in 1992 by Voter Research and Surveys; and in earlier years by The New York Times and CBS News.  Direct comparisons from year to year should factor in differences in how questions were asked. Race and sex were determined by interviewers in surveys before 1984. Independent or third-party candidates are not shown.  Population scaling is representative of the number of voters in each category.  *Change is shown in percentage points. When comparable data are available, this measure combines the change in Republican support and the change in Democratic support from the previous election.
[Female Clinton Supporters Are Left Feeling Gutted]  In interviews here in the Lehigh Valley — a bellwether region in a swing state that helped elect Mr. Trump — and around the country, female supporters said theirs was a vote for Mr. Trump and not against Hillary Clinton. America was on the wrong track, the women said, and Mr. Trump alone could fix it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They are women who want their daughters to grow up and run businesses — and who run businesses themselves. Many said they were eager for a woman as president. Were they offended by Mr. Trump’s vile comments about women, captured on tape? Absolutely. Did they believe the women who came forward and said Mr. Trump had groped them? Not necessarily. Did any of it stop them from voting for him? No.  Where female opponents took to Twitter with #NotOkay, branding Mr. Trump a misogynist and worse, his female supporters saw “a good man and a good father,” said Mary Barket, the head of the Pennsylvania Federation of Republican Women, who knows Ms. Biro from church and helped her get involved in the Trump campaign.  Ms. Biro, who said she was “a quiet, reserved person,” had never knocked on doors or worked in politics before. But she spent one day each weekend since August canvassing for Mr. Trump.  Photo  Where those who voted against Mr. Trump saw someone who bankrupted businesses and ducked paying taxes, these women said they saw a man who built a real estate empire and simply followed the law. They saw a man who had raised and promoted a beautiful and successful daughter, Ivanka, and who let a smart and accomplished Washington strategist, Kellyanne Conway, manage his presidential campaign.  In short, they embraced Mr. Trump’s sales pitch for himself.  “I think that women see the big picture — women are smart,” Mrs. Gauta said. “The fact that he said something crude,” she said “is not going to change my mind about the good he can do for our country.  “Did I like that, no,” she went on. “But do I think he can do a better job than Hillary? Absolutely. I think he has got the best interests of this country at heart. He’s got a beautiful family; he wants to leave a nice country — the great country he was raised in — for his kids. And I think he said the only way I’m going to get that done is by being president myself.”  She took her sons, 14 and 16, to a Trump rally, and said she “was even more impressed by him in person than on TV.” But as to his sometimes foul mouth, “If my boys ever said anything like that, I’d put them over my knee and spank them.’’  In Chicago, Nicole Been, 22, a Roman Catholic who attends DePaul University, is deeply opposed to abortion and the “hookup culture.” She complained that other students branded her a racist and a bigot for supporting Mr. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Philadelphia, Daphne Goggins, 53, an African-American community activist and ardent Republican, always knew she would vote for Mr. Trump. She said she believed decades of Democratic efforts had done little for black people. When Mr. Trump invited her to a minority outreach meeting, she told him tearfully that “for the first time in my life, I feel like my vote is going to count.” (Only 4 percent of black women, exit polls show, supported Mr. Trump, while 26 percent of Latinas did.)  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  For the women interviewed, as for male Trump backers, the economy was of utmost concern. Mrs. Gauta and her husband are tired of paying $1,800 a month in health care premiums, with a $12,000 annual deductible. Ms. Lincoln, the retired college administrator, now works at her husband’s auto body shop in Old Town, Me., to help pay the bills.  Ms. Ostendorf, the graphics producer in Los Angeles, watched her father’s million-dollar business implode in the economic crash of 2008. He picked up work doing maintenance for the Y.M.C.A.  “I’ve seen America fall down,” she said, “and a big part of Trump that appealed to me was his business plan.”  Photo  And they said they are troubled, as well, by an America that seems to have embraced multiculturalism and political correctness without question. They said they did not understand the Black Lives Matter movement, wondered why Democrats seemed so fixated on transgender access to bathrooms and tended to be enraged at the way veterans are treated and violence directed at the police.  They are concerned about immigration and the threat of terrorism.  Bobbye Horton, 67, of Grand Junction, Colo., who is Hispanic, approved of Mr. Trump’s plan to build a wall with Mexico. On Wednesday she wore a “Viva Trump” T-shirt. Immigrants, she said, needed to use legal channels or stay out. “He got at the heart of America.”  Research suggests Americans in both parties long ago became open to a female president. By 1999, the Gallup poll found that 92 percent of Americans said they would vote for a woman. When Gallup first asked that question, in 1937, the figure was 33 percent.  “People no longer hear, ‘Do you want a woman to be president?’” Ms. Conway said in an interview in February, before she became Mr. Trump’s campaign manager. “They hear, ‘Do you want that woman?’”  This held true in many conversations with Mr. Trump’s female supporters. Many said they simply avoided talking about voting for him with Democratic female friends, for fear it would damage their sisterly bonds. (Ms. Biro never speaks of politics at yoga or at work.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “When I told them that I was supporting Trump, they were, like, shocked, oh my gosh, ‘there is no way I could support him,’” Ms. Biro said of her friends. “But I was like, ‘Everybody has their thing.’”  Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster, said the party had expected “a surge of women” to support Mrs. Clinton, but that did not happen. While Mrs. Clinton did better with women in almost every demographic group, Ms. Lake said, “Trump won very solidly the white women’s vote, and we know that was fed by white, blue-collar women.”  Ms. Biro comes close to fitting that mold; although she considers herself middle class, she did not go to college. And Nazareth, a middle-class community in Northampton County, is the kind of community where Mr. Trump did well.  Yet sitting in the kitchen of her tidy Cape Cod-style home here, with the Trump-Pence signs still stuck in the front yard and a poster that speaks of peace as a path to enlightenment on the living room wall, Ms. Biro expressed the same hopes and fears for the country that many of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters now have.  “Hopefully he’s going to try to unite people,” she said of the president-elect. “We have to try to help people heal, so people can learn to trust, and have faith that things are going to be O.K.”
But if Mr. Trump makes good on his campaign promises, experts in climate change policy warn, that legacy would unravel quickly. The world, then, may have no way to avoid the most devastating consequences of global warming, including rising sea levels, extreme droughts and food shortages, and more powerful floods and storms.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has already vowed to “cancel” last year’s Paris climate agreement, which commits more than 190 countries to reduce their emissions of planet-warming carbon dioxide pollution, and to dismantle the Clean Power Plan, Mr. Obama’s domestic climate change regulations.  “If Trump steps back from that, it makes it much less likely that the world will ever meet that target, and essentially ensures we will head into the danger zone,” said Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences and international affairs at Princeton University and a member of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which produces global reports on the state of climate science.  Mr. Trump cannot legally block other countries from fulfilling their Paris agreement commitments, nor can he quickly or unilaterally erase Mr. Obama’s climate rules.  But he can, as president, choose not to carry out the Paris plan in the United States. And he could so substantially slow or weaken the enforcement of Mr. Obama’s rules that they would have little impact on reducing emissions in the United States, at least during Mr. Trump’s term.  That could doom the Paris agreement’s goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions enough to stave off an atmospheric warming of at least 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, the point at which, many scientists say, the planet will be locked into an irreversible future of extreme and dangerous warming.  Without the full participation of the United States, the world’s second-largest greenhouse gas polluter, after China, that goal is probably unattainable, even if every other country follows through on its pledges.  And, the experts say, without the participation of the United States, other governments are less likely to carry out their pledged emissions cuts.  “That target is already extremely difficult to achieve, but it could be done with very hard, very diligent work by every single country,” Mr. Oppenheimer said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The election of Mr. Trump is likely to cast a pall over Marrakesh, Morocco, where global negotiators have gathered for a 12-day conference to hash out the next steps for the Paris accord: how to verify commitments are being met, and how to pay for enforcement by poor countries that cannot afford the technology or energy disruptions.  Traveling in New Zealand, Secretary of State John Kerry was asked if he still planned to attend the conference, given the results of the election.  “I’m absolutely going to Marrakesh, perhaps even more important,” he said. “And I look forward to being there very, very much.”  Pessimism appears to be warranted. Mr. Oppenheimer and other climate policy experts said all major emitters needed to take action in the near term to stave off the 3.6-degree increase.  Scientific reports released over the last two years have concluded that the measurable warming of the planet because of human activities has already begun. This year is on track to be the hottest on record, blasting past the previous records set in 2015 and 2014.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  An analysis by Climate Interactive, a scientific think tank that provides data used by many governments, concluded that the policies by the United States would account for about 20 percent of the expected greenhouse gas reductions under the Paris plan from 2016 to 2030. But absent the expected policy actions in the United States under the Trump administration, scientists at Climate Interactive said, the math of emissions reductions will be much more difficult to maintain.  “Pessimists will find abundant support for despair this morning,” John Sterman, a professor of system dynamics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wrote in a Climate Interactive analysis on Wednesday morning.  “With Mr. Trump in the Oval Office and Republican majorities in both houses,” Mr. Sterman wrote, “there is little hope that the Clean Power Plan will survive in the Supreme Court or for federal action to meet the U.S. commitment under the Paris accord. Worse, other key emitter nations — especially India — now have little reason to follow through on their Paris pledges: If the U.S. won’t, why should developing nations cut their emissions?”  The Clean Power Plan is the ambitious centerpiece of Mr. Obama’s climate change legacy and the key to his commitment under the Paris accord. At its heart is a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations intended to curb planet-warming pollution from coal-fired power plants. If enacted, the rules could transform the American electricity sector, close hundreds of coal-fired plants and usher in the construction of vast new wind and solar farms. The plan is projected to cut United States power plant emissions 32 percent from 2005 levels by 2030.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the program is currently under litigation by 28 states and more than 100 companies, and it is expected to go before the Supreme Court as early as next year.  More Reporting on Climate Change  Mr. Trump and other Republicans have attacked the Clean Power Plan as a “war on coal.” As president, Mr. Trump would not have the legal authority to unilaterally undo the regulations, which were put forth by the E.P.A. under a provision of the 1970 Clean Air Act.  However, Mr. Trump could target the rules by appointing an industry-friendly justice to the Supreme Court and then refusing to defend the plan when it goes before the court.  He could also direct the E.P.A. to reissue the plan to be extremely friendly to industry. Such a move would also be subject to lawsuits by environmental advocates, which would further drag out the process. And in concert with congressional Republicans, he could decimate the E.P.A.’s budget, crippling its rule-making capacity.  “They may still have to have a regulation, but they don’t have to do it the way the Obama administration did it,” said Jeff Holmstead, a former E.P.A. official in the George W. Bush administration. “And in the meantime, those suits often go on for years and years.”  Even if Mr. Trump ultimately fails to gut Mr. Obama’s climate change rules, he could ensure that their enforcement is delayed through his term, as lawsuits wind their way through the courts.  Mr. Trump would face difficulties in his plans to eliminate the E.P.A., although it is likely he could substantively reduce its size. He would need approval from Congress to completely erase the agency, said Jody Freeman, a professor of environmental law at Harvard University and a former counselor to Mr. Obama.  Ms. Freeman noted that several major environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act, specifically call for rules to be enacted and overseen by the E.P.A. Changing those decades-old rules would also require action from Congress, and Senate Democrats would certainly block such efforts — unless Senate Republican leaders opt to scuttle what is left of filibuster rules already weakened by Democrats.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In China, the world’s largest greenhouse gas polluter, climate change officials said they intended to continue with plans to cut carbon emissions regardless of Mr. Trump’s plans. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has vowed under the Paris agreement that Chinese emissions will drop after 2030, and that China will put in place a national system next year to force companies to pay a fee for their carbon pollution.  “China’s attitude toward low-carbon development, as President Xi Jinping has said when he met with Secretary of State Kerry earlier, is that tackling climate change is not something anybody asks us to do,” Chai Qimin, a Chinese negotiator, said in an emailed response from the Marrakesh talks. “It’s what we want to do.”  But in India, the world’s third-largest greenhouse gas polluter, the election of Mr. Trump has raised doubts about a willingness to move forward. Under the Obama administration, Hillary Clinton, then secretary of state, pledged that rich countries would mobilize $100 billion annually by 2020 to help poor countries make the transition to cleaner forms of energy. Indian officials have made clear that their steps to cut emissions will depend on financial aid from rich countries, but Mr. Trump has also vowed to cut all “global warming payments.”  “I think most certainly it will affect the momentum in negotiations because it throws up a lot of questions,” said Arunabha Ghosh, chief executive of the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, a New Delhi policy group.  “The chances of public funds coming from climate finance are much more dismal now,” he said. “Right now I don’t feel very optimistic.”
“The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer,” Mr. Trump told supporters around 3 a.m. on Wednesday at a rally in New York City, just after Mrs. Clinton called to concede.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a departure from a blistering campaign in which he repeatedly stoked division, Mr. Trump sought to do something he had conspicuously avoided as a candidate: Appeal for unity.  “Now it’s time for America to bind the wounds of division,” he said. “It is time for us to come together as one united people. It’s time.”  That, he added, “is so important to me.”  He offered unusually warm words for Mrs. Clinton, who he has suggested should be in jail, saying she was owed “a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country.”  Bolstered by Mr. Trump’s strong showing, Republicans retained control of the Senate. Only one Republican-controlled seat, in Illinois, fell to Democrats early in the evening. And Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, a Republican, easily won re-election in a race that had been among the country’s most competitive. A handful of other Republican incumbents facing difficult races were running better than expected.  Mr. Trump’s win — stretching across the battleground states of Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania — seemed likely to set off financial jitters and immediate unease among international allies, many of which were startled when Mr. Trump in his campaign cast doubt on the necessity of America’s military commitments abroad and its allegiance to international economic partnerships.  From the moment he entered the campaign, with a shocking set of claims that Mexican immigrants were rapists and criminals, Mr. Trump was widely underestimated as a candidate, first by his opponents for the Republican nomination and later by Mrs. Clinton, his Democratic rival. His rise was largely missed by polling organizations and data analysts. And an air of improbability trailed his campaign, to the detriment of those who dismissed his angry message, his improvisational style and his appeal to disillusioned voters.  He suggested remedies that raised questions of constitutionality, like a ban on Muslims entering the United States.  He threatened opponents, promising lawsuits against news organizations that covered him critically and women who accused him of sexual assault. At times, he simply lied.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump’s unfiltered rallies and unshakable self-regard attracted a zealous following, fusing unsubtle identity politics with an economic populism that often defied party doctrine.  His rallies — furious, entertaining, heavy on name-calling and nationalist overtones — became the nexus of a political movement, with daily promises of sweeping victory, in the election and otherwise, and an insistence that the country’s political machinery was “rigged” against Mr. Trump and those who admired him.  Video  He seemed to embody the success and grandeur that so many of his followers felt was missing from their own lives — and from the country itself. And he scoffed at the poll-driven word-parsing ways of modern politics, calling them a waste of time and money. Instead, he relied on his gut.  At his victory party at the New York Hilton Midtown, where a raucous crowd indulged in a cash bar and wore hats bearing his ubiquitous campaign slogan “Make America Great Again,” voters expressed gratification that their voices had, at last, been heard.  “He was talking to people who weren’t being spoken to,” said Joseph Gravagna, 37, a marketing company owner from Rockland County, N.Y. “That’s how I knew he was going to win.”  For Mrs. Clinton, the defeat signaled an astonishing end to a political dynasty that has colored Democratic politics for a generation. Eight years after losing to President Obama in the Democratic primary — and 16 years after leaving the White House for the United States Senate, as President Bill Clinton exited office — she had seemed positioned to carry on two legacies: her husband’s and the president’s.  Video  Her shocking loss was a devastating turn for the sprawling world of Clinton aides and strategists who believed they had built an electoral machine that would swamp Mr. Trump’s ragtag band of loyal operatives and family members, many of whom had no experience running a national campaign.  On Tuesday night, stricken Clinton aides who believed that Mr. Trump had no mathematical path to victory, anxiously paced the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center as states in which they were confident of victory, like Florida and North Carolina, either fell to Mr. Trump or seemed in danger of tipping his way.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton watched the grim results roll in from a suite at the nearby Peninsula Hotel, surrounded by her family, friends and advisers who had the day before celebrated her candidacy with a champagne toast on her campaign plane.  But over and over, Mrs. Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate were exposed. She failed to excite voters hungry for change. She struggled to build trust with Americans who were baffled by her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state. And she strained to make a persuasive case for herself as a champion of the economically downtrodden after delivering perfunctory paid speeches that earned her millions of dollars.  The returns Tuesday also amounted to a historic rebuke of the Democratic Party from the white blue-collar voters who had formed the party base from the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt to Mr. Clinton’s. Yet Mrs. Clinton and her advisers had taken for granted that states like Michigan and Wisconsin would stick with a Democratic nominee, and that she could repeat Mr. Obama’s strategy of mobilizing the party’s ascendant liberal coalition rather than pursuing a more moderate course like her husband did 24 years ago.  But not until these voters were offered a Republican who ran as an unapologetic populist, railing against foreign trade deals and illegal immigration, did they move so drastically away from their ancestral political home.  To the surprise of many on the left, white voters who had helped elect the nation’s first black president, appeared more reluctant to line up behind a white woman.  From Pennsylvania to Wisconsin, industrial towns once full of union voters who for decades offered their votes to Democratic presidential candidates, even in the party’s lean years, shifted to Mr. Trump’s Republican Party. One county in the Mahoning Valley of Ohio, Trumbull, went to Mr. Trump by a six-point margin. Four years ago, Mr. Obama won there by 22 points.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mrs. Clinton’s loss was especially crushing to millions who had cheered her march toward history as, they hoped, the nation’s first female president. For supporters, the election often felt like a referendum on gender progress: an opportunity to elevate a woman to the nation’s top job and to repudiate a man whose remarkably boorish behavior toward women had assumed center stage during much of the campaign.  Mr. Trump boasted, in a 2005 video released last month, about using his public profile to commit sexual assault. He suggested that female political rivals lacked a presidential “look.” He ranked women on a scale of one to 10, even holding forth on the desirability of his own daughter — the kind of throwback male behavior that many in the country assumed would disqualify a candidate for high office.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Tuesday, the public’s verdict was rendered.  Uncertainty abounds as Mr. Trump prepares to take office. His campaign featured a shape-shifting list of policy proposals, often seeming to change hour to hour. His staff was in constant turmoil, with Mr. Trump’s children serving critical campaign roles and a rotating cast of advisers alternately seeking access to Mr. Trump’s ear, losing it and, often, regaining it, depending on the day.  Even Mr. Trump’s full embrace of the Republican Party came exceedingly late in life, leaving members of both parties unsure about what he truly believes. He has donated heavily to both parties and has long described his politics as the transactional reality of a businessman.  Mr. Trump’s dozens of business entanglements — many of them in foreign countries — will follow him into the Oval Office, raising questions about potential conflicts of interest. His refusal to release his tax returns, and his acknowledgment that he did not pay federal income taxes for years, has left the American people with considerable gaps in their understanding of the financial dealings.  But this they do know: Mr. Trump will thoroughly reimagine the tone, standards and expectations of the presidency, molding it in his own self-aggrandizing image.  He is set to take the oath of office on Jan. 20.
The decision to target Mr. Comey for his unusual decision to publicly disclose the inquiry came during an 8 a.m. internal conference call, after aides saw reports that Justice Department officials were furious, believing he had violated longstanding guidelines advising against such actions so close to an election.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Even before Mrs. Clinton spoke in Florida, her campaign chairman, John D. Podesta, and campaign manager, Robby Mook, criticized Mr. Comey for putting out incomplete information and breaking with Justice Department protocol.  “By providing selective information, he has allowed partisans to distort and exaggerate to inflict maximum political damage,” Mr. Podesta said during a conference call with reporters. “Comey has not been forthcoming with the facts,” he added, describing the director’s letter to Congress on Friday as “long on innuendo.”  Whatever shortcomings Mrs. Clinton may have as a candidate, Saturday’s coordinated effort showed that the political organization that she, her husband and her allies had built over decades remained potent and would not let what seemed like victory erode easily. By midday, Mr. Comey, a Republican appointed by President Obama and confirmed nearly unanimously by the Senate, found himself in its cross hairs.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Encouraged by Mrs. Clinton’s senior aides to reframe the story and make it about Mr. Comey’s actions, liberal groups such as the Congressional Black Caucus demanded that he release more information. Other surrogates were emailed talking points prodding them to deem it “extraordinary that 11 days before the election a letter like this — with so few details — would be sent to 8 Republican committee chairmen.” (Ranking Democrats on the committees also received copies.)  Mr. Comey has not publicly commented on the investigation, other than with the letter saying that more emails were being examined. He also wrote an email to F.B.I. employees explaining that he felt he had to inform Congress even though the agency did not yet know “the significance of this newly discovered collection of emails.”  With Mrs. Clinton leading Donald J. Trump in nearly every battleground state, Clinton advisers were emphatic that they would not be thrown off stride. They said they would not change any political strategy, television advertising or campaign travel plans.  For months, the F.B.I. had investigated whether Mrs. Clinton had broken any laws by using a private email server while she was secretary of state. This past summer, Mr. Comey said that Mrs. Clinton had been “extremely careless” by allowing sensitive information to be discussed outside secure government servers, but that the agency had concluded that Mrs. Clinton had not committed a crime. The investigation was closed.  But on Friday, Mr. Comey notified Congress that the agency had discovered emails, possibly relevant to the investigation, that belonged to Mrs. Clinton’s top aide, Huma Abedin. The emails were discovered on the computer of Ms. Abedin’s estranged husband, Anthony D. Weiner, during a separate investigation into allegations that he had exchanged sexually explicit messages with a teenager.  According to several Clinton advisers, Mrs. Clinton told them overnight and on Saturday that she wanted the campaign to operate normally, not rashly, while pressuring Mr. Comey to dispel any possibility that her candidacy was under legal threat.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the Clinton team also had to deal with a newly emboldened Mr. Trump, who urged voters at a rally on Saturday in Golden, Colo., to oppose Mrs. Clinton because of her “criminal action” that was “willful, deliberate, intentional and purposeful.”  Handed a new opening against Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump used the moment to baselessly claim there had been an internal F.B.I. “revolt” and made a sexually suggestive joke about Mr. Weiner.  “As Podesta said, she’s got bad instincts,” Mr. Trump said, distorting a comment in one of the thousands of Mr. Podesta’s hacked emails recently released by WikiLeaks. “Well, she’s got bad instincts when her emails are on Anthony Weiner’s wherever.”  The paramount fear among Clinton advisers and Democratic officials was that an election that had become a referendum on Mr. Trump’s fitness for office, and that had increasingly seemed to be Mrs. Clinton’s to lose, would now become just as much about her conduct.  In phone calls, email chains and text messages on Saturday, Clinton aides and allies were by turns confident that the F.B.I. would find nothing to hurt Mrs. Clinton and concerned that the inquiry would nudge demoralized Republicans to show up to vote for down-ballot candidates — and perhaps even cast ballots, however reluctantly, for the battered Mr. Trump.  “This is like an 18-wheeler smacking into us, and it just becomes a huge distraction at the worst possible time,” said Donna Brazile, the chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee and a close Clinton ally. “We don’t want it to knock us off our game. But on the second-to-last weekend of the race, we find ourselves having to tell voters, ‘Keep your focus; keep your eyes on the prize.’”  As much as Clinton advisers stressed that they were not panicking, some of them radiated anger at Mr. Comey, Mr. Weiner and even Mrs. Clinton — a reflection of 18 months of frustration that her personal decisions about her email practices and privacy were still generating unhelpful political drama. Two Clinton aides, for example, pointedly noted in interviews that it was difficult to press a counterattack without fully knowing what was in Ms. Abedin’s emails.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Some prominent Democratic women, meanwhile, were angry that a murky announcement from the F.B.I. might impede the election of the first female president of the United States.  “It worries me because it gives the Republicans something to blow up and fan folks’ anger with,” said former Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, who considered a run for the Democratic nomination for president in 1988. “I was on the Judiciary Committee when I was in Congress, and I have never seen the F.B.I. handle any case the way they have handled hers.”  Photo  While some voters are undecided, about 20 million Americans have already cast ballots in early voting, and millions more long ago concluded which candidate they would support.  In a polarized country where many are unwaveringly contemptuous of either Mr. Trump or Mrs. Clinton, the latest development in the email story prompted a mix of shrugs and renewed determination from the left and told-you-so claims of Clinton perfidy from the right.  “My mind was made up,” said Luis Luaces, 57, a Florida Republican who expressed little surprise about the Weiner email twist as he cast his ballot for Mr. Trump on Saturday in Miami. “I know what the Clintons are about.”  Democrats also said the development had done little to alter their perceptions. In Charlotte, N.C., Ian Leemans, 35, a Democrat, said he had been at work checking news sites when he saw a flashing banner with Friday’s news. He had already planned to vote early for Mrs. Clinton, but after the news, he felt even more urgency to cast his ballot.  “I thought, O.K., this is going to be an advantage for Trump people to say, ‘Oh, it is a rigged election,’” Mr. Leemans said. “So I thought, ‘Oh, I need to make sure I get up at 8 o’clock on a Saturday and vote.’”  Several Republican pollsters and strategists said that given Mr. Trump’s weakness, the F.B.I. inquiry was more likely to help the party’s candidates for the House and Senate than to transform the political fortunes of Mr. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “To the extent this affects relative enthusiasm among Republicans and Democrats, it helps down-ballot Republicans,” said Whit Ayres, a pollster advising one such candidate seeking re-election, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. Referring to Mrs. Clinton’s lead over Mr. Trump in recent polls, Mr. Ayres added, “The margin at the top of the ticket is large enough so that it probably takes an indictment, rather than an investigation, to move those numbers sufficiently.”  With control of the Senate on a knife’s edge and Democrats wielding Mr. Trump’s unpopularity like a weapon to make gains in the House, Republicans were exultant to at least get off the defensive.  While few Republicans were willing to argue that Mr. Comey’s letter could revive Mr. Trump, they said that the new revelations dovetailed with a message they were already pushing: that Democratic candidates would only enable Mrs. Clinton’s instinct for secrecy and not hold her accountable.  “It boosts the check-and-balance argument because it is a reminder of all of the things voters hate about Clinton,” said Rob Simms, the executive director of the House Republican campaign arm.
But it was Mr. Trump’s remark about the election results that stood out, even in a race that has been full of astonishing moments.  Every losing presidential candidate in modern times has accepted the will of the voters, even in extraordinarily close races, such as when John F. Kennedy narrowly defeated Richard M. Nixon in 1960 and George W. Bush beat Al Gore in Florida to win the presidency in 2000.  Mr. Trump insisted, without offering evidence, that the general election has been rigged against him, and he twice refused to say that he would accept its result.  “I will look at it at the time,” Mr. Trump said. “I will keep you in suspense.”  “That’s horrifying,” Mrs. Clinton replied. “Let’s be clear about what he is saying and what that means. He is denigrating — he is talking down our democracy. And I am appalled that someone who is the nominee of one of our two major parties would take that position.”  Mrs. Clinton then ticked off the number of times he had deemed a system rigged when he suffered a setback, noting he had even called the Emmy Awards fixed when his show, “The Apprentice,’’ was passed over.  “It’s funny, but it’s also really troubling,” she said. “That is not the way our democracy works.”  Mrs. Clinton also accused Mr. Trump of extreme coziness with Mr. Putin, criticizing him for failing to condemn Russian espionage against her campaign’s internal email.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  When Mr. Trump responded that Mr. Putin had “no respect” for Mrs. Clinton, she shot back, in one of the toughest lines of the night: “That’s because he’d rather have a puppet as president of the United States.”  “No puppet, no puppet,” Mr. Trump sputtered. “You’re the puppet.” He quickly recovered and said, “She has been outsmarted and outplayed worse than anybody I’ve ever seen in any government, whatsoever.”  With 20 days left before Election Day and early voting already underway in Florida, Ohio and several other key states, the debate felt less like an argument between equals than a last-ditch attempt by a fading candidate, Mr. Trump, to save himself.  Mr. Trump sought throughout the debate to recover from a politically damaging three weeks. He has been unable to gain traction in the polls from his strategy of assailing the Clintons as corrupt and immoral; the news media as biased and bent on rigging the election against him; and the nine women who have come forward to accuse him of unwanted sexual advances as liars and, in some cases, unattractive.  Mr. Trump said, in response to a question from the debate moderator, Chris Wallace of Fox News, that the claims of the women had been “debunked” and that they had been put forward by Mrs. Clinton’s campaign.  But after he denied ridiculing the looks of the women accusing him of sexual harassment — “I did not say that,” he repeated three times — Mrs. Clinton repeated nearly verbatim his two comments from last week about the appearances of a pair of his accusers.  “Donald thinks belittling women makes him bigger,” she said. “He goes after their dignity, their self-worth; and I don’t think there is a woman anywhere who doesn’t know what that feels like.”  After Mrs. Clinton finished an extended condemnation, Mr. Trump said only: “Nobody has more respect for women than I do, nobody.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In contrast to their two previous debates, the 90-minute discussion covered significant substantive ground. On immigration, Mr. Trump argued that Mrs. Clinton wanted to give illegal immigrants “amnesty” and that “she wants to have open borders.”  “We have to have strong borders, we have to keep the drugs out of our country — right now we’re getting the drugs, they’re getting the cash,” he added. “We have some bad hombres here, and we’re going to get them out.”  Mrs. Clinton recalled meeting a young girl in Las Vegas whose parents had been threatened, and noted that Mr. Trump has said that every illegal immigrant would ultimately be subject to deportation.  “I don’t want to rip families apart,” Mrs. Clinton said. “I don’t want to see the deportation force that Donald has talked about in action in our country.”  Photo  At several points, Mrs. Clinton tried to bait Mr. Trump into an outburst, such as when she said that he “choked” during his meeting this summer with the president of Mexico when he did not press him on Mexico paying to build a border wall.  But Mr. Trump pivoted to attack former President Bill Clinton’s administration for supporting the North American Free Trade Agreement and assailed Mrs. Clinton for her past comments supporting “open borders” in the Western Hemisphere.  Mr. Trump also called the Clinton Foundation “a criminal enterprise.” Mrs. Clinton returned fire by ridiculing Mr. Trump’s foundation, which she noted purchased “a six-foot portrait of Donald.”  “I mean, who does that?” she asked.  The two candidates also tangled over abortion rights. After initially declining to flatly say whether he would support overturning Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision that legalized abortion, Mr. Trump conceded that the justices he would appoint to the court would do just that.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “If we put another two or perhaps three justices on, that’s really what will happen,” he said. “That’ll happen automatically in my opinion.”  Mrs. Clinton responded with a full-throated defense of Roe and abortion rights.  “The government has no business in the decisions that women make,” she said.  Mr. Trump retorted, “If you go with what Hillary is saying, in the ninth month you can take the baby and rip the baby out of the womb of the mother just prior to the birth of the baby.”  Mrs. Clinton appeared visibly angry. “You should meet with some of the women I’ve met with,” she said, accusing him of using “scare rhetoric.”  Mrs. Clinton used the opening question about the Supreme Court to make a broad appeal to voters to consider the future of the United States under her presidency or a Trump administration. “What kind of country are we going to be? What kind of opportunities are we going to provide for our citizens, what kind of rights will Americans have?”  Mr. Trump asserted that if Mrs. Clinton won, the Second Amendment would become “a very, very small replica of what we have now.” He also said he would appoint justices who “will interpret the Constitution the way the founders want it interpreted.”  Mrs. Clinton quickly tried to undercut Mr. Trump on guns.  “I support the Second Amendment,” she said, noting that she had lived in Arkansas and represented upstate New York where many gun owners lived. “When I think about what I need to do, we have 33,000 people a year who die from guns. I think we need comprehensive background checks” and to close loopholes that make it easier for Americans to buy guns.  On the economy, Mrs. Clinton described Mr. Trump as a hypocrite, accusing him of crying “crocodile tears” over manufacturers moving abroad while noting that he uses foreign steel for his hotel in Las Vegas.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That prompted a ferocious counterattack from Mr. Trump, demanding why she had not done more to improve the economy during her years in public life.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Why the hell didn’t you do it over the last 15 or 20 years,” he demanded, adding: “The one thing you have over me is experience, but it’s bad experience.”  Mrs. Clinton, clearly prepared for him to return to this line of attack, responded with a carefully prepared salvo.  She compared what the two of them had been doing since the 1970s, highlighting her public service accomplishments and ridiculing him for borrowing money from his father, mocking a beauty queen as “an eating machine” and hosting a reality television show.  “On the day when I was in the Situation Room, monitoring the raid that brought Osama bin Laden to justice, he was hosting “The Celebrity Apprentice,’” Mrs. Clinton said.  Mr. Trump defended himself by boasting about his business success and said the country would be well served if it was run in the fashion of his company.  Mrs. Clinton, reaching for not just a win but a mandate, made both direct and more subtle appeals to Republican voters. She noted that in the 1980s Mr. Trump had criticized Ronald Reagan over his stewardship, twice invoking the name of the late president revered by so many Republicans.  Remarkably, Mr. Trump demanded additional time to speak so he could note that he did, in fact, disagree with Reagan over trade. Mrs. Clinton, in that moment, came off as more respectful to Republican history.  “I would like to say to everyone watching tonight that I’m reaching out to all Americans, Democrats, Republicans and independents,” she said, “because we need everybody to help make our country what it should be.”
And he has plenty of company.  An examination of 75 think tanks found an array of researchers who had simultaneously worked as registered lobbyists, members of corporate boards or outside consultants in litigation and regulatory disputes, with only intermittent disclosure of their dual roles.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  With their expertise and authority, think tank scholars offer themselves as independent arbiters, playing a vital role in Washington’s political economy. Their imprimatur helps shape government decisions that can be lucrative to corporations.  But the examination identified dozens of examples of scholars conducting research at think tanks while corporations were paying them to help shape government policy. Many think tanks also readily confer “nonresident scholar” status on lobbyists, former government officials and others who earn their primary living working for private clients, with few restrictions on such outside work.  Photo  Largely free from disclosure requirements, the researchers’ work is often woven into elaborate corporate lobbying campaigns.  “A report authored by an academic is going to have more credibility in the eyes of the regulator who is reading it,” said Michael J. Copps, a former F.C.C. commissioner who is a special adviser for the Media and Democracy Reform Initiative at Common Cause, a liberal group. “They are seeking to build credibility where none exists.”  And it is a decidedly bipartisan practice.  Roger Zakheim, a visiting fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, has used research to push for greater spending for new military equipment while working as a lobbyist for Pentagon suppliers like Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems, lobbying records show.  At the liberal-leaning Brookings Institution, Dr. Mark B. McClellan led a health care studies program as he served on the board of directors at Johnson & Johnson, where he was paid $264,899 last fiscal year. The company sells a high-cost hepatitis C treatment, an approach that Dr. McClellan defended from his Brookings perch.  Carol M. Browner, a former top environmental adviser to President Obama, works as a paid consultant to the nuclear power industry, pushing for government policies that help keep nuclear power plants online. Until recently, she also served as an unpaid senior fellow at the Center for American Progress.  The overlapping roles are often not made clear, and even members of Congress say they are frequently unaware of the financial ties between industries and the witnesses with think tank titles appearing before them at hearings.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “They can make a very deceptive and false claim to credibility that is totally lacking,” said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, who said he had become increasingly disturbed by the role of think tank experts on Capitol Hill. “I think about it every time there is a witness now from a ‘think tank,’ putting that term in very boldface quotes.”  Scholars sometimes include general references to their private-sector work in their official biographies. Mr. Eisenach, for example, notes that he is an executive at NERA Economic Consulting in addition to his position at the American Enterprise Institute. And when a private company pays him or his consulting firm to publish a study, he discloses the name of the corporate sponsor on the study.  But there is no way for the public or policy makers to know Mr. Eisenach’s full roster of NERA clients. And there is no comprehensive disclosure of these clients when he writes his think tank reports or academic papers, testifies before Congress, or meets with F.C.C. members or staff.  Photo  Mr. Eisenach declined repeated requests to comment in detail. But a spokeswoman for the American Enterprise Institute, Judy Mayka Stecker, said she saw no conflict in his roles.  “We believe in the open competition of ideas and encourage our scholars to engage with experts from all sectors and viewpoints,” she said.  Yet even as The Times was making inquiries about the potential for conflicts of interest among some think tank researchers, officials at a number of the nation’s most prominent institutions — including Brookings and the Peterson Institute for International Economics — acknowledged that they were revising conflict-of-interest policies.  “I think we have too much influence of funded research with clear interests at stake that is treated as though it is independent and academic research,” said Yochai Benkler, a professor at Harvard Law School and co-director of its Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society. “There is no culture in the discipline to mark funded research clearly, or systematically treat it as less reliable.”  Net Neutral?  Several weeks after Tom Wheeler was sworn in as the F.C.C. chairman in 2013, he received a letter signed by more than a dozen prominent economists and scholars identified by their affiliations with Washington think tanks or academic institutions.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The economic evidence, they declared, showed that the internet should not be regulated as a public utility. They urged Mr. Wheeler to reject “net neutrality” regulations that would give the federal government additional powers to oversee the $100 billion market for internet services, dominated by AT&T, Verizon and Comcast.  A footnote on the first page of the letter indicated that none of the scholars who signed had been compensated by stakeholder companies. But of the dozen studies they submitted as evidence, more than half had been funded by telecommunications giants or based on other work for the companies, industry ties that were disclosed only in footnotes in the original studies.  No federal rules required broader disclosure. Yet on many highly technical policy issues like telecommunications regulation, scholarship is dominated by industry-funded research, according to a review of hundreds of studies, regulatory filings and other documents.  “Let’s say you’re in legal and you want to have a paper that says what you want it to say,” said Dennis Weller, a former Verizon economist who occasionally consults for telecommunications companies and international organizations. “You could have a bunch of economists in house and ask them if they agree with you. How much easier would it be to go to an outside economist and say, ‘How about if I pay you $100,000 to write this?’”  Photo  Few policy battles have had higher stakes in recent years than the debate over net neutrality — a catchall term for proposals to restrict internet service providers from blocking websites or regulating speed.  To bolster their claims that the regulations would hurt consumers, companies have financed research that contends the rules would reduce investment in new services and raise prices. That work is used to shape the public debate and to build an industry-funded narrative in the regulatory record, one that the F.C.C. is required by law to evaluate.  Industry-sponsored research has also figured prominently in court battles over F.C.C. efforts to regulate the internet. When Verizon successfully opposed an earlier F.C.C. rule on net neutrality, more than half of the 23 studies or expert declarations cited in court filings had been sponsored directly by telecommunications companies or trade associations, according to an analysis by The Times. Other studies had been published under the banner of think tanks but written by scholars who consulted extensively for companies.  The attacks began to grow particularly heated nearly two years ago, when Mr. Obama called on Mr. Wheeler and his fellow F.C.C. commissioners to regulate the internet like traditional phone lines.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In December 2014, Robert Litan, then a senior fellow at Brookings, and Hal Singer, then a senior fellow at the left-leaning Progressive Policy Institute, released a “policy brief” claiming that such a proposal could cost $15 billion in new fees. (They later revised the figure to $11 billion.)  The study mentioned their employment at Economists Incorporated, a consulting firm in Washington. But a reader would have had to do more research to learn that Economists Incorporated’s clients included AT&T and Verizon, companies leading the industry’s charge against the commission proposal. That was disclosed on a “select client list” on the Economists Incorporated website.  Mr. Singer and Mr. Litan’s study quickly became central to the industry’s lobbying campaign. The National Cable and Telecommunications Association, a trade group that is listed as an Economists Incorporated client, began an advertising campaign, based on the study, that ran in Washington and beyond. When debate on the proposal started in Congress, the study was repeatedly cited by lawmakers who wanted to block Mr. Wheeler’s plan.  “People who are running advertisements are not going to say, ‘In a study we paid for,’” said Mr. Litan, now an adjunct senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. “In the public discourse, the disclaimers often do get dropped.”  Photo  Mr. Singer, in a Twitter post directed at critics of the study, was a bit more blunt.  “None of us works for free,” Mr. Singer wrote. “So let’s focus on the merits & be nice to each other!”  In an interview, Mr. Singer said he — like most scholars — disclosed when a client commissioned a particular study published through his consulting firm. Most specialists in the telecommunications field, he suggested, are well aware of his business connections and views on regulatory issues.  “Everybody is on different teams,” Mr. Singer said. “So long as you tell the audience what team you are on, you can then offer the opinions. Disclosure is the antidote to all of this.”  Few scholars have been as active in the net neutrality debate as Mr. Eisenach.  At least a dozen times between 2007 and 2016, Mr. Eisenach published studies — including one analysis later released under the American Enterprise Institute’s banner — that were underwritten by Verizon or a Verizon-supported trade association. (He also wrote two papers last year for Facebook, which has declared its support for net neutrality.) In the fall of 2013, he became the director of the think tank’s new center on media and internet policy. A few months later, he joined NERA, one of the country’s oldest and best-known economic consultancies, as a senior vice president of the firm’s telecommunications practice, the latest in a string of jobs at industry consulting firms.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Jeff is good at linking big theoretical ideas to policy, and he’s been good at making money doing that,” said Mr. Weller, the former Verizon economist. “He’s been good at moving from think tank to think tank and company to company, and I don’t think he’s ever lost money doing it.”  Mr. Eisenach has testified before Congress, filed comment letters to the F.C.C. that mention his status as an American Enterprise Institute scholar, and met privately with F.C.C. commissioners, according to emails obtained through an open records request. He has also organized public briefings featuring, among others, Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota, the chairman of the Senate commerce committee, which oversees the F.C.C. Mr. Eisenach used his position as a think tank researcher to help rally opposition to net neutrality regulations.  At a given moment, it can be difficult to determine which hat Mr. Eisenach is wearing.  In September 2014, at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on net neutrality, the formal meeting agenda listed Mr. Eisenach as a visiting scholar at the institute.  His written testimony mentioned that he also served as “co-chair of NERA Economic Consulting’s Communications, Media and Internet Practice,” but included no explicit reference to clients like Verizon. As he opened his testimony, Mr. Eisenach suggested that his opposition was based purely on his personal views.  “While I am here in my capacity as a visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, the views I express are my own, should not be attributed to A.E.I. or to any of the organizations with which I am affiliated,” he said.  He then detailed his vehement opposition to further federal regulation of the internet.  “The potential costs of net neutrality regulation are both sweeping and severe,” he said. “It is best understood as an effort by one set of private interests to enrich itself by using the power of the state.” Both the institute and his consulting firm posted his testimony on their websites.  Mr. Eisenach was similarly ambiguous when he interacted with members of the F.C.C., according to dozens of emails obtained by The Times, all but one of which was sent from Mr. Eisenach’s email address at the American Enterprise Institute.  On behalf of the think tank, he sought meetings with F.C.C. commissioners and lawyers to discuss the rules, and briefed the commission’s Republican members on what its general counsel was telling him about Mr. Wheeler’s thinking. Mr. Eisenach offered speaking slots at American Enterprise Institute events to the two Republican members on the commission, urging one to use a January 2015 forum to speak out against the proposed regulations.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Net neutrality is obviously top of mind,” he said in an email to that commissioner, Michael O’Rielly. “I’d be delighted if you would use the opportunity to lay out the case against.”  Photo  Ms. Stecker, the institute spokeswoman, said it should be no surprise that the opinions of experts like Mr. Eisenach were in demand. The think tank requires scholars to submit an annual report on any “outside activities,” she added, and A.E.I. has “not as an institution sought to influence or constrain” this work.  Other technology companies like Google and Comcast have also underwritten research by think tank scholars, whose findings typically dovetail with the companies’ lobbying agenda. Geoffrey Manne, for example, who runs the Oregon-based International Center for Law and Economics and is a senior fellow at the Washington-based think tank TechFreedom, has frequently written pieces questioning federal antitrust investigations of Google while accepting financial support from the company.  Double Duty  While private consulting arrangements can leave scholars’ ties to corporate interests murky, the conflict is more apparent when think tank researchers do double duty as registered lobbyists.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  C. Stewart Verdery Jr., as a senior associate at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, one of Washington’s most influential think tanks, hosted a panel of experts in December to discuss a federal program — now being expanded — that tightens border security by having the American authorities conduct passport checks in foreign airports.  Mr. Verdery made clear that he favored the preclearance effort, which speeds the arrival of travelers in the United States.  “It provides unmatched benefits to our security, travel facilitation and passenger convenience,” Mr. Verdery said as he introduced the other speakers, including Howard Eng, the president and chief executive of the Greater Toronto Airports Authority, during an event that was broadcast on C-Span.  Photo  Mr. Verdery, a former senior official at the Department of Homeland Security whose office helped run the inspection program at foreign airports, briefly mentioned that in addition to his status as a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, he was the founder of the Monument Policy Group.  Left unsaid: Mr. Eng’s airports authority is one of Mr. Verdery’s regular lobbying clients, paying his firm $130,000 last year to influence the Obama administration and Congress.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Officials at the Toronto airport, with Mr. Verdery’s help, have been trying to persuade the American authorities to increase staff and equipment to reduce bottlenecks sometimes created by the preclearance program.  Asked whether it was appropriate for a lobbyist to host his clients at a think tank event, Mr. Verdery said, “It is fairly typical.”  Mr. Verdery is not paid by the think tank, he noted. He does benefit from the C.S.I.S. title, however, when laying out a client’s case.  As of late last year, at least 70 unpaid senior advisers and associates listed on the think tank’s website had simultaneously worked as consultants. Seven others listed as C.S.I.S. senior advisers or associates during the past five years had worked as registered corporate lobbyists while holding the positions.  Officials at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, when asked about Mr. Verdery, said his December presentation should not have occurred.  “This event did not meet our standards of transparency and integrity,” the think tank said in a statement in response to questions. “This constituted a lapse in oversight from C.S.I.S.”  Mr. Verdery is no longer listed among the think tank’s senior associates.  Video  Bruce Bartlett, a scholar who has worked at the Cato Institute and the Heritage Foundation, said it was becoming the norm in Washington for lobbyists and consultants like Mr. Verdery to vie for nonresident scholar posts to help them burnish sales pitches to corporate clients.  “Clients prefer it that way,” Mr. Bartlett said. “They get a chance to have their work done by scholars.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Christopher Miller, a former policy adviser to Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, has worked as a paid senior visiting fellow on energy and environmental issues at Third Way, a centrist think tank, while also a registered lobbyist for Covanta Energy, which owns waste-to-energy facilities that burn municipal trash. Mr. Miller acknowledged in an interview that his clients could benefit from the work he had done briefing members of Congress on behalf of his think tank.  “I don’t think they see any downside,” Mr. Miller said of his corporate clients and the think tank.  While Mr. Miller is not well known, he has high-profile company.  Within three months of leaving Congress in January 2011, Byron L. Dorgan, a former Democratic senator from North Dakota, had been named a co-chairman of government relations and a senior policy adviser for the energy industry lobbying team at the Washington offices at Arent Fox — as well as a senior fellow, specializing in energy issues, at the Bipartisan Policy Center, a Washington think tank.  Mr. Dorgan did not immediately register as a lobbyist, but his firm has oil and gas industry clients.  Using his post at the Bipartisan Policy Center, Mr. Dorgan urged Congress and the Obama administration to do more to promote oil and gas production in the United States. He was often joined by Trent Lott, a former Republican senator from Mississippi and another Bipartisan Policy Center fellow working simultaneously as a lobbyist. Together, they sent letters under think tank letterhead to Congress, and Mr. Dorgan testified before the House Subcommittee on Energy and Power in favor of expanded oil and gas production in the United States.  Mr. Dorgan’s most aggressive efforts relate to the National Biodiesel Board, which he has represented as a lobbyist since 2014, earning his firm $240,000 a year. He has written op-ed pieces, given speeches and set up meetings with top officials at the Environmental Protection Agency on behalf of the biodiesel board, emails obtained by the New England Center for Investigative Reporting show. Mr. Dorgan generally does identify himself as both a think tank scholar and an Arent Fox senior policy adviser representing the biodiesel industry.  Asked if his dual role represented a conflict of interest, Mr. Dorgan said that the premise of the Bipartisan Policy Center was “to bring interested parties together to find solutions to difficult problems,” and that he was proud to work there.  Photo  Mr. Zakheim, of the American Enterprise Institute, is also a lobbyist at Covington & Burling L.L.P., where, on behalf of BAE Systems, he is urging Congress and the Defense Department to increase spending on ground combat vehicles that the company manufactures. Other clients include Northrop Grumman, which is building a new long-range Air Force bomber.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In October, as a “visiting fellow,” Mr. Zakheim contributed to an 87-page American Enterprise Institute report, “To Rebuild America’s Military,” which concluded that strengthening the military’s ground forces and land combat vehicles would be an “essential key to deterrence in Europe and success in the greater Middle East.”  The report did not mention that Mr. Zakheim was a paid lobbyist. His client, BAE, recently won a contract to supply the vehicles.  Some scholars add another twist: They serve on corporate boards directly related to their areas of expertise at think tanks.  Dr. McClellan, a former commissioner at the Food and Drug Administration who until January was a senior fellow at Brookings, has been a go-to expert for the federal government as it debates how to cope with surging costs of prescription drugs.  At public events, Dr. McClellan emphasized the extraordinary progress by the pharmaceutical industry in coming up with treatments for diseases like diabetes, H.I.V. and hepatitis C.  “Lots of diseases have been transformed,” Dr. McClellan said at a hearing in November sponsored by the Department of Health and Human Services. He ran through a series of slides prominently stamped with Brookings’s name. He also argued that even though these drugs were very expensive, they were worth it given the improvement in a patient’s quality of life.  “They are, over all, a pretty good deal,” Dr. McClellan said, referring to treatments for hepatitis C. One such drug, manufactured by Johnson & Johnson, generated $2.3 billion in sales in its first full year, representing about 7 percent of the company’s overall drug sales in 2014. The pills cost $66,000 for a standard 12-week regimen.  There was no mention in a video of the event that Dr. McClellan joined Johnson & Johnson’s board of directors in October 2013, or that he earned nearly $530,000 over the past two years in overall compensation from the company. That is in addition to his salary at Brookings, where he is one of the top-paid scholars, with $353,145 in wages and other compensation from the think tank in 2014, tax records show.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Dr. McClellan, in a statement, disputed any suggestion that he might have had a conflict.  “My entire career in academics, government and public policy has focused on evidence-based ways to improve health and restrain costs for consumers, and my extensive track record speaks for itself,” he said.  Ms. Browner, a former E.P.A. administrator under President Bill Clinton, has traveled to cities around the world — including Chicago and Davos, Switzerland — where introductions of her included her credential as a distinguished senior fellow at the Center for American Progress. But she is also a member of the leadership council of Nuclear Matters, an industry-funded group that pays her to promote nuclear energy. At these stops, she has argued that any solution to climate change must include nuclear energy because it generates power without producing emissions that are blamed for global warming, even though, as an environmentalist, she was once a critic of nuclear power.  She said that her change of heart on nuclear power had predated her engagement with Nuclear Matters, and was motivated by her desire to combat climate change, not by payment from the industry.  “Obviously, the single most important thing any individual has is their reputation,” she said in an interview. “I have worked really hard to be forthcoming about what I stand for and believe in. I am who I am.”  Ms. Browner has since resigned as a senior fellow at the center, but she remains on the board.  ‘A Glass House’  Adam S. Posen, the president of the Peterson Institute, considered the world’s pre-eminent think tank on global economics, has a commanding view of the construction of the new headquarters for the American Enterprise Institute, as well as the main office of Brookings. In his office, he recently had a series of uncomfortable conversations with three scholars he had decided to let go.  After much internal debate, Mr. Posen decided to formally prohibit Peterson’s scholars from holding outside jobs that directly related to the field they wrote about on behalf of the think tank.  The three who had such outside engagements were terminated.  Mr. Posen noted that the change did not imply the researchers had done anything wrong. But tighter rules are needed, he said, to respond to a growing sense he shares with the Peterson board that the think tank industry must reassert its commitment to impartiality.  “I live in a glass house,” said Mr. Posen, a Harvard-trained economist who previously served on the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, gesturing toward the floor-to-ceiling glass that provides him stunning views.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Our reputation is built on our credibility,” Mr. Posen said. “Without being perceived as credible and objective, our studies just get thrown on the scrap heap.”  Photo  The Urban Institute, a Washington-based think tank that focuses on issues confronting cities, has decided to require that its scholars with any outside jobs detail the relationship in their writings.  “Urban’s greatest asset is its reputation for objective research that is based upon rigorous academic and ethical standards,” the institute’s president, Sarah Rosen Wartell, said in a December memo to her staff.  And at Brookings, executives imposed new rules in December requiring that unpaid nonresident scholars use their title from any paying job, not from Brookings, if they testify before Congress. They are also prohibited from using their affiliation with Brookings in any research report they publish under contract with an outside party.  “These are designed to avoid not just conflicts of interests, but the appearance of conflicts of interests,” said Martin S. Indyk, the executive vice president at Brookings.  Separately, Brookings terminated its relationship with Mr. Litan in September after he failed to make clear that testimony he provided to a Senate committee last year, based on a study he had done as a private consultant, “left the false impression that Brookings was connected with the report and the testimony,” Strobe Talbott, the Brookings president, said in a letter explaining the matter.  Mr. Eisenach, for reasons he would not specify, said he was no longer working on issues related to net neutrality — even though he had taken up the topic on behalf of the American Enterprise Institute as recently as January and published an industry-funded report through his consulting firm in February that discussed it.  “I’ve moved on to other issues,” Mr. Eisenach said.  Such steps are long overdue, said Thomas Medvetz, the author of the 2012 book “Think Tanks in America” and an associate professor of sociology at the University of California, San Diego.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It has gotten to the point where everyone in Washington has their own expert,” Mr. Medvetz said. “It is yet another reflection of the tremendous influence of economic power in American politics — as with money, you can create your own vehicles of political influence.”  Still, not everyone is worried about the multiple roles played by think tank scholars.  Representative Greg Walden, Republican of Oregon, oversaw a House hearing on the F.C.C.’s net neutrality rule early last year. Among the evidence he submitted into the congressional record was a Wall Street Journal op-ed article co-written by Robert M. McDowell, a Hudson Institute scholar who also serves as a telecommunications industry lawyer at a firm retained by AT&T to lobby on net neutrality.  “Everyone’s got their point of view,” Mr. Walden said in an interview last year. “And some of them get paid to have that point of view.”
Photo  SAN FRANCISCO — California, Massachusetts and Nevada legalized marijuana on Tuesday in what advocates said was a reflection of the country’s changing attitude toward the drug.  Leading up to the election, recreational marijuana use was legal in four states: Alaska, Colorado, Oregon and Washington, along with Washington, D.C.  With the addition of California, Massachusetts and Nevada, the percentage of Americans living in states where marijuana use is legal for adults rose above 20 percent, from 5 percent.  Representative Earl Blumenauer, Democrat of Oregon and a supporter of legalization, said Tuesday’s votes would add to the pressure on the federal government to treat cannabis like alcohol, allowing each state to decide on its own regulations.  “The new administration is not going to want to continue this toxic and nonproductive war on drugs,” Mr. Blumenauer said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The federal government’s ban on the drug precludes the interstate sale of cannabis, even among the states that have approved its use. But Tuesday’s votes created a marijuana bloc stretching down the West Coast, and Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor of California, said he saw an opportunity for the states where recreational marijuana is now legal to “coordinate and collaborate” on the issue, including applying pressure in Washington to relax the federal ban.  A Gallup poll in October found nationwide support for legalization at 60 percent, the highest level in the 47 years the organization has tracked the issue.  Support is rising even though some public health experts warn that there have been insufficient studies of the drug’s effects and that law enforcement agencies lack reliable tests and protocols to determine whether a driver is impaired by marijuana.  Supporters in California portrayed legalization as both a social justice and a criminal justice issue, saying the measure would help redress the disproportionate numbers of arrests and convictions among minorities for drug crimes.  “I think of this victory in California as a major victory,” said Lauren Mendelsohn, the chairwoman of the board of directors of Students for Sensible Drug Policy, a group that has campaigned against the government’s war on drugs. “It shows the whole country that prohibition is not the answer to the marijuana question.”  Ms. Mendelsohn spoke at a celebration in Oakland for the passage of Proposition 64, as California’s legalization measure was known.  Supporters of legalization in California vastly outspent opponents.  As of Nov. 6, pro-legalization committees in the state had raised around $23 million, according to the California secretary of state’s office. Chief among the backers were marijuana companies and tech entrepreneurs, including Sean Parker, a founder of the file-sharing service Napster and a former president of Facebook, who was the single largest donor to the campaign. The anti-legalization campaign had spent less than $2 million in California.  Kevin Sabet, the president of Smart Approaches to Marijuana, one of the country’s major funders against marijuana legalization initiatives, attributed the imbalance in campaign spending to investments by marijuana companies hoping to profit if the industry was legalized.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “There’s a lot of money to be made if marijuana is legal, not a lot of money to be made if it remains illegal,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Opponents of legalization say the adoption of medical marijuana laws in more than 25 states has led to a popular perception that cannabis is good for you. They have called for more studies on the drug’s long-term effects, particularly on the developing brains of young people.  “There is likely medical promise in the marijuana plant, but that is different than saying smoked marijuana is medicine,” Mr. Sabet said. “We wouldn’t smoke the opium plant to get the beneficial effects of morphine.”  A bill to legalize marijuana in Vermont, supported by Gov. Peter Shumlin, a Democrat, failed earlier this year. But in Massachusetts, public support for legalization rose during the fall, even with bipartisan opposition from the state’s top elected officials — including Gov. Charlie Baker, a Republican, and Attorney General Maura Healey, a Democrat — and an organized anti-legalization campaign.  Lawmakers in Rhode Island were watching Massachusetts closely, and they are expected to take up a legalization measure of their own now that one has passed there.  Two other states — Arizona and Maine — were voting on recreational marijuana legalization Tuesday. Arizona voted against the measure. In Maine, a state with a libertarian streak that began decriminalizing marijuana decades ago, the referendum on legalization drew scant funded opposition.  Still, proponents of legalization said California would represent the biggest victory because of its huge economy and population and also its fertile soil and amenable climate.  Tuesday’s vote reinforced the state’s position as the epicenter of marijuana cultivation for the country, a role it has had illicitly for decades. Marijuana companies have been positioning themselves for the prospect of interstate commerce, buying large plots of land in areas that now grow vegetables and other crops.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The California measure, which passed with 56 percent approval, allows people over 21 to possess limited amounts of marijuana for personal use and also permits the personal cultivation of up to six plants in private residences, provided they are shielded from public view. The sale of recreational marijuana will not be allowed until licenses are issued, a process that will take at least two years, said Steve DeAngelo, the founder of Harborside, a medical marijuana dispensary in Oakland.  California officials expect additional tax revenue of around $1 billion from marijuana sales. The revenue is earmarked for the study of medical marijuana, for the California Highway Patrol to develop procedures to determine driver impairment due to marijuana consumption, for youth education on drugs, and for the prevention of environmental damage from marijuana production, among other programs.  Support for legalization in California cut across all age groups except voters over 65, according to a Field poll released on Friday. Among those older voters, 42 percent were in favor, and 57 percent were against.  A large majority of Republicans in the poll, 65 percent, were against the measure, compared with 72 percent support among Democrats.  Support has been rising steadily since the 1960s, when only around 10 percent of California adults favored legalization, according to a 1969 Field poll, and legalization was the culmination of decades of campaigning by proponents. A measure to decriminalize marijuana in 1972 was soundly rejected in California, with 66.5 percent of voters opposed to it. In 1996, California voted to allow medical marijuana. But a 2010 measure to permit recreational use failed.  In addition to Tuesday’s votes on recreational marijuana, Arkansas, Florida, Montana and North Dakota had medical marijuana initiatives on the ballot. All four passed the legislation.
Mr. Trump also began the day in this state, rallying supporters in Tampa, where he recognized Hispanic supporters in his audience and declared “the Cubans just endorsed me,” citing an award he had been given by a group of Cuban-Americans. Without explaining what he meant, Mr. Trump said, “The Hispanic vote is turning out to be much different than people thought.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He also continued to assail Mrs. Clinton over her use of a private email server as secretary of state, highlighting the F.B.I.’s apparent discovery of messages on a computer used by Huma Abedin, a longtime Clinton aide, and her estranged husband, the former congressman Anthony D. Weiner. But, continuing a recent pattern, Mr. Trump hurled claims at Mrs. Clinton that were highly speculative.  “Anthony Weiner has probably every classified email ever sent,” said Mr. Trump. “And, knowing this guy, he probably studied every single one, in between using his machine for other purposes.”  The F.B.I. is investigating whether Mr. Weiner sent sexually explicit text messages to a 15-year-old.  Mr. Trump also stopped on Saturday in North Carolina, and took advantage of the time-zone differences by flying west for evening rallies in Colorado and Nevada.  In Reno, Nev., he was rushed offstage by Secret Service agents after someone shouted that a member of the crowd had a gun, a reminder of the charged atmosphere at many of his events. No weapon was found, and Mr. Trump returned to finish his speech after a few minutes.  By holding events in those four increasingly diverse states, he was signaling a refusal to concede any ground to Mrs. Clinton and rejecting the strategy of past presidential candidates who have fought within the confines of a narrower electoral map in the campaign’s final hours.  He even announced Saturday morning that he planned to add a stop in Minnesota, long a Democratic bulwark and a state he had not been even contesting.  But the evidence from polling and the early voting turnout seemed to indicate he was facing the possibility of sweeping losses in states with sizable Hispanic populations, most likely affected by the racially tinged language he has used since beginning his campaign over 16 months ago, when he claimed the ranks of Mexican migrants were filled with rapists and drug dealers.  Photo  “The story of this election may be the mobilization of the Hispanic vote,” said Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, an anti-Trump Republican who has pleaded with his party to do more to win over Latinos. “So Trump deserves the award for Hispanic turnout. He did more to get them out than any Democrat has ever done.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The question for Republicans, just 12 years after President George W. Bush carried at least a third of the Hispanic vote, is how long the Trump-inflicted damage with Latinos will haunt them.  Raising the specter of how difficult it has been for California Republicans since former Gov. Pete Wilson’s hard line toward illegal immigrants there, Mr. Graham said, “If we don’t come to grips with the demographic challenges we have with Hispanics in presidential politics, we’ll never right the ship.”  In Florida, at least 200,000 more Hispanics had voted early as of Friday than did during the entire early voting period four years ago, according to an analysis by Steve Schale, a Democratic strategist who helped run President Obama’s two campaigns here.  The turnout has been particularly explosive in South Florida and Central Florida, where thousands from Puerto Rico and other regions of Latin America have migrated in recent years. And 24 percent of the Hispanics casting early ballots were first-time voters, the analysis showed.  “It’s the demographics that are bailing her out,” Mr. Schale said.  In Orlando, voters waited up to 90 minutes on Saturday at one early voting location at a library, some spending the time taking pictures of one another in front of candidates’ signs. Parking lots for a quarter-mile surrounding the area were packed.  Mrs. Clinton clearly carried the day there. Jon-Carlos Perez, 30, an independent voter and a concrete laborer originally from Puerto Rico, said he cast his vote for Mrs. Clinton in part because “she’s not an idiot like Trump.”  Alyssa Perez, 23, a doctoral student at the University of Central Florida who voted at another busy location in Orlando, said she considered Mr. Trump to be “anti-women, anti-Hispanic, anti-Muslim” and said, “I don’t want to live in a country where there is a president who has those kinds of views.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Canvassing on Saturday morning in North Miami, Mary Kay Henry, the president of the Service Employees International Union, and a handful of local members focused on households, many of them Haitian or Hispanic, with an infrequent voting history. But nearly every resident who answered their door assured her they had already voted.  “The word is out,” said Ms. Henry, as roosters scooted between yards.  But it was not just Florida where Hispanics were poised to send a powerful message. In Nevada, which has the fastest-growing Latino population in the West, Democrats appeared to have built a fearsome advantage in Las Vegas’s Clark County at the end of early voting Friday, largely because of a surge of votes from Mexican-Americans. The early voting period was extended until 10 p.m. at one Hispanic grocery store in Las Vegas, where the images of hundreds of voters waiting in line ricocheted across the internet. (On Saturday, Mr. Trump claimed, without any evidence, that the hours had been extended so Democrats could be bused in.)  As of the end of early voting on Thursday, five states with surging Hispanic populations — Arizona, Colorado, Florida, North Carolina and Nevada — had already cast ballots equivalent to over 50 percent of their total turnout from 2012, according to an analysis by Catalist, a Democratic data firm.  While the changing face of the American electorate seemed to offer Mrs. Clinton a political cushion, the F.B.I.’s decision to continue investigating her use of a private email server as secretary of state appeared to push some loosely committed white voters away. Mr. Trump has seized on the issue in virtually every speech, repeatedly insinuating that Mrs. Clinton was on the verge of being charged despite no evidence to support the claim.  “She’s under multiple federal investigations, has committed many crimes, including perjury, and she’s now facing the prospect of a federal indictment,” Mr. Trump said as he delivered the Republican Party’s weekly radio address.  And Mr. Trump has been trying to take advantage of Mrs. Clinton’s slippage in mostly white states by making a late incursion into Michigan and Wisconsin.  Acknowledging that Mr. Trump is threatening the grip Democrats have had on Michigan in presidential races since 1988, Mrs. Clinton appeared on Friday in Detroit and planned an event in Grand Rapids for Monday while announcing that Mr. Obama would visit Ann Arbor the same day.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  She appeared in Philadelphia on Saturday night, before heading on Sunday to New Hampshire, and then returning to Ohio, where she was to appear with the Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James in a state Mr. Obama twice captured but has proved elusive for her.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton also dispatched her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine, to Wisconsin and onetime rival, Senator Bernie Sanders, to Iowa over the weekend to blunt Mr. Trump’s support among white voters. A new Des Moines Register poll this weekend showed Mr. Trump leading Mrs. Clinton by seven points in Iowa.  But Mrs. Clinton can afford to lose Ohio and Iowa and even Michigan and still easily amass the 270 electoral votes needed for victory if she is able to secure the Southern and Western states that have tilted away from Republicans as they lost ground with nonwhites over the past decade: Virginia, North Carolina and Florida, as well as New Mexico, Colorado and Nevada.  And while she may not win every one of these diverse states, capturing most of them would be enough to deny Mr. Trump any path to the White House.  “You can credit him for that,” said Karl Rove, the Republican strategist. “Not her.”
At the same rally, one of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters, Mark Cuban, the billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks, put it even more bluntly: “There’s going to come a time, if Donald Trump, God help us, was president, where a Putin or an Assad would say to him, ‘Donald, if you do this, I’ll give you $20 billion,’” Mr. Cuban said, referring to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Do you think he’s going to do what’s right for the country? Or do you think he is going to take the money?”  For more than a year now, reporters from The New York Times have been scouring Mr. Trump’s business record, exploring the cycles of boom and bust, the spectacular reinventions, the shady business partners, the audacious tax avoidance maneuvers and the persistent deceptions that have been the leitmotif of his five decades of deal making.  That review reveals plenty of reasons to be skeptical of Mr. Trump’s oft-stated promise to direct every ounce of his business acumen and negotiating prowess in service of the American people. But the same review also reveals patterns of behavior and qualities of leadership that could indeed help Mr. Trump fulfill his now-familiar sales pitch to voters: “If we could run our country the way I’ve run my company, we would have a country that you would be so proud of.”  Photo  Mr. Trump, for example, has won millions of supporters by promising to renegotiate, abrogate or ignore any number of written commitments made by past American presidents, like trade deals, climate change pacts, even the Geneva Conventions. If there is one recurring theme in the litigation spawned by Mr. Trump’s business ventures, it is his brazen willingness to ignore the plain terms of contracts he finds inconvenient while relentlessly enforcing contract terms he finds useful.  Another recurring theme — one that might come in handy given the inherent unpredictability of the White House — is Mr. Trump’s strategic flexibility.  When either his ambitions or circumstances shift, Mr. Trump has shown himself willing to make swift and dramatic course corrections in his businesses. From the moment Mr. Trump took the reins of the real estate business his father founded, he was bent on reinvention, steering its focus away from mostly middle-class apartment projects in the other boroughs to big, splashy commercial developments in Manhattan. It is a formula Mr. Trump has returned to time and again as he has cycled through different money making personas.  His foray into reality television with “The Apprentice” was the biggest and most successful detour, a decision that came to look prescient with the collapse of the real estate market and recession in the late 2000s. Then, sensing opportunity in the public’s economic anxiety, Mr. Trump remade himself yet again, this time as a sort of walking infomercial for get-rich-quick schemes. He peddled Trump University, a real estate sales seminar, and a multilevel vitamin marketing business called Trump Network as ways for average people to make money during difficult times.  Mr. Trump, who has pledged major spending to rebuild crumbling roads, bridges and airports, also has a track record, albeit with significant blemishes, of completing complex and politically fraught construction projects on time and under budget, most famously in the 1980s when, in a matter of months, Mr. Trump refurbished Wollman Rink in Central Park, a project the City of New York had notoriously failed to complete after years of budget overruns and false starts. Likewise, last month when he attended the grand opening of his latest Trump International Hotel, just blocks from the White House, Mr. Trump boasted that the hotel was completed under budget and ahead of schedule.  “In my whole life, I’ve gotten things done,” Mr. Trump said in an interview with The Times in May. “Whether it’s getting a city built on the West Side of Manhattan or getting zoning board approvals, my whole life has been finding a consensus.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Any assessment of how Mr. Trump might use the White House to advance his financial interests is impaired by his unwillingness to release his tax returns, even in summary form, breaking with four decades of tradition followed by both Democratic and Republican candidates. His tax returns, for example, would reveal far more information about the nature of and financing behind his partnerships, which number in the hundreds.  An investigation by The Times this summer into Mr. Trump’s maze of real estate holdings in the United States found that Mr. Trump’s companies owed at least $650 million, or twice the amount that could be gleaned from the financial disclosure reports Mr. Trump submitted to run for the presidency. Separately, partnerships in which he has a significant interest have loans from the Bank of China and Goldman Sachs, two powerful financial institutions his administration could expect to encounter.  Further complicating matters is his plan to have his children continue running his business empire should he occupy the Oval Office. “I would probably have my children run it with my executives, and I wouldn’t ever be involved because I wouldn’t care about anything but our country,” Mr. Trump said at a debate in January.  The potential for conflicts of interest are all the more glaring given the prominent role his children have played in his political operation, both as surrogates and advisers.  Photo  “We are not going to be involved in government,” Donald Trump Jr. said during an interview with ABC’s George Stephanopoulos. Mr. Stephanopoulos asked how conflicts could be avoided given that Mr. Trump was aware of all his business interests. “We’re not going to discuss those things,” his son replied. “It doesn’t matter. Trust me.”  Regardless of how carefully the Trumps police potential conflicts of interest, critics have been quick to note that Mr. Trump’s tax proposals alone would clearly benefit his business empire, not to mention the estate his children could expect to inherit on his death. Less clear is how Mr. Trump’s oversight of the Internal Revenue Service might impact an agency that has had Mr. Trump or his partnerships under nearly constant audit for more than two decades.  Then there are all the times Mr. Trump has used his business empire as a backdrop during his campaign — at times combining campaign statements with naked promotions for his properties, be it Trump Tower, where he first announced his campaign, or his golf courses in Scotland, where he took his press pool on a hole-by-hole tour, or, most notoriously, when he summoned reporters to his new Washington hotel to show off its gleaming marble amenities while, after stoking doubts for years, he admitted in one terse sentence that “President Barack Obama was born in the United States, period.”  Mr. Trump has given no indication that as president he would curb his compulsion to constantly promote the Trump brand, which, according to Mr. Trump’s own assessment of his total net worth, is now his single most valuable asset.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In June, Mr. Trump posted a message on Twitter that suggested how difficult this may be for him. Mr. Trump said that he had “instructed my execs” to reopen Trump University if he is elected president. “So much interest in it!”
Democrats’ hopes had risen largely because of Donald J. Trump’s weakness in some states and an overall disorganized Republican effort to rally potential voters. Now, at least four races — in New Hampshire, North Carolina, Indiana and Missouri — are considered dead heats, and Democratic prospects are only slightly better in Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Nevada.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  An even split or a bare minimum majority for either party in the next Congress, one with an aggressive policy agenda, no matter who sits in the White House, seems increasingly possible.  “I think Democrats have enough opportunities to get to 50,” said Nathan L. Gonzales, the editor of The Rothenberg & Gonzales Political Report, a nonpartisan newsletter, “but I am still not clear what combination of states make that happen.”  Democrats will need four more seats if Mrs. Clinton is elected, or five if Mr. Trump prevails, to regain control of the Senate.  Photo  In the House, Republicans are bracing for a loss of possibly a dozen seats, but will almost certainly remain in control, albeit with a majority in which a conservative faction could continue to roil the party.  “This election is most like 1980,” Peter D. Hart, a veteran Democratic pollster, said of the election in which Ronald Reagan’s large victory also delivered the Senate to Republicans. “If the presidential election narrows to less than 3 percent, then Democrats will need some good fortune to win control of the Senate. My advice is to watch the margin between Clinton and Trump.”  Unlike many other races around the country, the fight for the Senate seat in New Hampshire features two women whom voters know well in a state where most elected officials seem familiar with at least half the people they run into. Ms. Ayotte was the state’s attorney general before she was elected to the Senate, and Ms. Hassan is a product of the Democratic mentoring system under Senator Jeanne Shaheen, another former governor.  Both have run well-calibrated campaigns focused on the state’s opioid problem and fiscal future. Both have been accessible to voters, who expect it here, with six debates, 10 candidate forums and dozens of campaign stops.  Ms. Ayotte runs a five-kilometer race almost every Saturday in towns around the state, and favors truck stops and town dumps to meet voters. She will campaign for 24 straight hours beginning Monday morning. “It’s going to be fun,” she said, perhaps redefining notions of enjoyment.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Hassan has relied on the star power of her party, campaigning in recent weeks with Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who won the state big in the Democratic primary; as well as Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts; Michelle Obama, the first lady; and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “I am just working hard every day,” Ms. Hassan said at a bakery last week.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Ms. Ayotte has struggled mightily with the candidacy of Mr. Trump, at first giving him lukewarm support. And when asked during a debate if she saw Mr. Trump as a role model for youths, she replied, “Absolutely.” She then put out a statement contradicting the remark, which became a bludgeon for Ms. Hassan. Ms. Ayotte finally dumped Mr. Trump, a dizzying ride that may have tainted her brand of independence. Ms. Hassan has had her own troubles with Mrs. Clinton.  The New Hampshire race has been staggeringly expensive, with over $100 million spent on behalf of the two candidates, the majority of which has supported an all-out assault of television advertising. “I should be embarrassed to have either of you as my senator,” Larry Gray, a doctor in Portsmouth, groused during a Rotary Club meeting where Ms. Hassan spoke.  Only the Senate race in Pennsylvania, which has nearly 10 times the population of New Hampshire, has attracted more outside money. Outside spending on Senate races nationally has passed half a billion dollars this cycle, a record.  Photo  As in other states, there are messy battles outside the Senate contest. Representative Frank C. Guinta, Republican of New Hampshire, is embroiled in a campaign finance scandal that caused Ms. Ayotte to call for his resignation. His opponent, for the fourth time, is former Representative Carol Shea-Porter.  “The Republicans are not helping themselves down ballot,” said Andrew E. Smith, a political scientist and pollster at the University of New Hampshire. “When you have a party that is not unified, it makes it difficult for them to win, especially when they are not the majority party.”  Ms. Hassan hopes to be aided by an elaborate turnout operation conducted by the Clinton campaign. But Ms. Ayotte is unlikely to get any corollary benefit from Mr. Trump, who Republicans complain has a limited get-out-the-vote operation.  “I have no confidence in the Trump ground game,” said Fergus Cullen, a former chairman of the New Hampshire Republican Party, noting the swarms of volunteers for groups like Planned Parenthood and other Clinton supporters he has seen in the state, and the bumbling efforts of Trump volunteers, a complaint that has been echoed in many other states. “The idea that there is this team of Republicans working together is just not true.”  Still, Ms. Ayotte is clearly competitive in a race where both sides believe they have a slight advantage, with scant real-time proof either way. “Both candidates are both under 50 percent,” said Rich Killion, a Republican strategist here. “But the weight of the stuff that has been thrown on Ayotte has not had the marginal effect Democrats want to open up the gap.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The story is largely the same in North Carolina, where the Republican incumbent, Senator Richard M. Burr, started late; and in Indiana and Missouri, where the Democratic challenger, former Senator Evan Bayh, and the Republican incumbent, Roy Blunt, have taken a beating for their lobbying ties. In Nevada, where Democrats are desperate to hold onto the seat of the retiring Harry Reid, Mr. Trump has been seen as a drag on the efforts of Representative Joe Heck to defeat the Democrat, Catherine Cortez Masto.  There are also clear signs of a tightening race in Wisconsin, where the Republican incumbent, Ron Johnson, has been aided by an enormous cash infusion from outside groups in his race against former Senator Russ Feingold, who held a double-digit lead for much of the year. In Pennsylvania, Senator Patrick J. Toomey may also be vulnerable to a negative Trump effect in the race against Katie McGinty.  Few know where the election is heading, even as so many are deeply invested in the outcome.  “I have two bumper stickers on my car,” Mr. Cullen said, one for Ayotte and one for Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, a former Republican candidate for president, “which is another way of saying, ‘Don’t blame me.’”  Mr. Cullen added, “I feel like I have never had an election in which I have had less confidence to say how it’s going to turn out.”
But the shift is clear nonetheless. In interviews, Americans who travel overseas and foreign observers say that tourists who once felt themselves the envy of the world now feel the sting of embarrassment. Businesses that once marketed their jeans and fleece jackets internationally as tiny pieces of the American dream are being advised to revamp their ad campaigns.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  United States diplomats more accustomed to mediating other countries’ disputes are now being called on to defend American democracy in the face of allegations that the election is “rigged.”  “I think it has affected the way that people see us,” said R. Nicholas Burns, a veteran diplomat who was under secretary of state for political affairs under President George W. Bush. “They don’t expect that from the United States. We are the people who go and monitor other people’s elections.”  Across the planet, people are contemplating the possibility that the United States might not be so exceptional after all.  “Much of the world is no longer in awe of you,” said Lyall Mercer, managing director of a public relations company in Australia.  Mr. Mercer noted that state lawmakers in Sydney had recently adopted a resolution by unanimous accord that described Mr. Trump as a “revolting slug.”  “Of course I understand this is about the candidate and not the country,” Mr. Mercer said. “But the very fact that they were willing to do this, with not one M.P. speaking against it — despite knowing they were ridiculing someone who could be the next president of our most important ally — I think speaks to the diminishing awe, or even respect.”  In Lebanon, where the United States’ image had already been battered — first by the 2003 invasion of Iraq, then by President Obama’s disengagement from the region — its staunchest defenders have been quieted.  “Even during the worst days of anti-Americanism in the Middle East, there were always pockets of people who had studied in the U.S. who still looked up to the United States,” said Hisham Melhem, a correspondent for An-Nahar, Lebanon’s leading daily newspaper. “Now, many of them have given up on the United States as a beacon of progress and enlightenment.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Arabs skeptical of the United States’ efforts to promote democracy in the region have eaten up allegations of sexual misconduct and embarrassing email leaks in the campaign, Mr. Melhem said: “They are mocking the American democratic process in ways that I’ve never seen before, and I’ve been covering elections since the early 1980s.”  In Africa, where political contests combining ethnic divisions, violence and the possibility of a challenge to the election’s result are not unfamiliar, some have made snarky suggestions that the African Union broker a “unity government” in the United States, using the Twitter hashtag #Nov8AfricaEdition.  The United States’ image abroad has fallen so much that trusty Canadians have begun their own campaign of reassurance: #TellAmericaItsGreat.  “The French fry is an American invention,” read one cheerful post. “Thanks America!”  Adversaries are also at work, trying to magnify the impression that American democracy is a sham.  In Russia, which is accused of hacking into the emails that have dogged Hillary Clinton’s campaign, newscasters portray the United States as under the control of dark, secretive forces. Vesti, a nightly news program in Moscow, reported that the firebombing of a Trump campaign office in North Carolina was an example of “attempts to kill those who have different views.”  Then there is Europe, where 85 percent of people in a recent Pew Research Center poll reported having no confidence in Mr. Trump to “do the right thing regarding world affairs.” There, his very popularity has tarnished America’s image.  Photo  “The overwhelming question that you get about the presidential election is ‘What are you people thinking?’” said Jeremy Shapiro, the Boston-born research director of the European Council on Foreign Relations. Although Europeans have been troubled by their own right-wing populists, “they expect the United States to be a rock of stability, a safety net they can rely on,” he said.  And the scorn does not fall solely on Mr. Trump.  K. Riva Levinson, who leads a boutique international consulting firm in Washington, said that during a recent trip to Ghana, people expressed disillusionment with what they saw as the unfairness of the Democratic primary contest between Mrs. Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “America is not a monarchy,” she said people told her. “It is not an office you are entitled to, either by birth or by marriage.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Others ask what has happened to the United States and its political talent pool, to result in two nominees so widely despised.  “These are the two best candidates they have to run the biggest economy and oldest democracy in the world?” asked Arvind Gupta, national head of digital and technology for India’s ruling party.  Perhaps the most important change in the image of the United States, however, is the one taking place within its own borders.  Americans’ trust in the political system has been shaken, whether because they believe Mr. Trump’s claims that it is rigged or because he has gotten so close to the presidency. Fifteen percent of voters have no confidence that their ballots will be properly counted, up from 6 percent in 2004, a New York Times/CBS News poll found.  “I believe, like Trump does, that the system is rigged,” said Ted Gregory, 79, of Camp Hill, Pa.  To Mr. Gregory, a retired business owner who travels abroad frequently, that loss of faith has gone hand in hand with what he sees as a decline in America’s stature, starting under Mr. Bush and continuing under Mr. Obama.  “I’m old enough to remember when you told someone that you were from the United States, they thought, ‘Lucky you,’” he said. “Now, I don’t know what they think.”  And so a Pandora’s box of unimaginables has been opened. America’s greatness, once considered a fact, is now a matter of debate. Its ironclad commitment to its allies seems less ironclad. Core values have been thrown into dispute. And for the first time since the republic’s earliest days, many wonder if there will be a peaceful transfer of power.  For months, many in government and business have sought to assess the damage. Big corporate leaders, including the chief executives of Starbucks and Wendy’s, have fretted about a tougher climate for American companies.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In July, Matt Levatich, the chief executive of Harley-Davidson motorcycles — featured prominently at rallies of bikers supporting Mr. Trump — blamed politics for sagging sales. “Our brand identity is connected strongly to the ideals of America, and when the ideals of America seem to no longer be our ideals anymore, it can’t help things,” he told TheStreet.com.  Ruth Bernstein, the co-founder of YARD, an ad agency known for its fashion campaigns, said she was advising American companies that sell overseas to move away from marketing an idealized version of America, because it no longer feels authentic.  “The brand of America relies heavily on the perception that the American dream is alive and well, that anyone can make it here and is welcome,” she said. The election has cast doubt on all that.  How long those doubts will linger is an open question.  Simon Anholt, an independent policy adviser who developed a poll of 25,000 people in 20 countries called the Nation Brands Index, said the United States had fallen to the world’s seventh-most-admired country after the Iraq war, but rebounded to No. 1 after Mr. Obama’s election.  Its image is unlikely to suffer lasting damage, he said, as long as the country does not carry out Mr. Trump’s promises to scrap trade agreements and military alliances.  “People don’t like countries that withdraw from the international sphere,” Mr. Anholt said, pointing to the tarnishing of Britain’s image after it voted to leave the European Union.  Even as the United States experiences an eye-opening look in the mirror, people in younger, shakier democracies are seeing a silver lining.  Amara Nwankpa, director of public policy initiatives at the Yar’Adua Foundation, which promotes good governance in Nigeria, expressed hope that “America will emerge from this experience a more empathetic partner” to third world countries.  “There’s some ironic reassurance in the fact that even the great United States of America could struggle this much with elections,” Mr. Nwankpa said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  If America can get it so wrong, he added, maybe one day Nigeria “could get it right.”
Together, the candidates and their allies are often overwhelming white candidates — some of whom have complained that they were targeted merely because of their race.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Since last year, the effort has produced two black district attorneys in rural Mississippi and one in Caddo Parish, La. — known as the nation’s leading jurisdiction for death sentences. And on Tuesday, four black candidates are expected to cruise to election as the top local prosecutors in Chicago; St. Louis; Orlando, Fla.; and suburban Henry County, Ga.  “In many ways, it is just as important as the governor’s race or the presidential race,” said Benjamin L. Crump, a Tallahassee, Fla., lawyer involved in the push, who has represented families of the victims in some of the most highly publicized killings of African-Americans in recent years, beginning with the shooting of Trayvon Martin by George Zimmerman in 2012.  “It may have a more profound effect on your life than any national office will have, because this is going to determine whether your children get trumped-up charges and have the words ‘felony conviction’ on their backs for the rest of their lives,” Mr. Crump said, “or, even worse, if they are going to be killed in cold blood and broad daylight, and no one will be held accountable for it.”  Aramis Ayala, who defeated a Democratic incumbent in the primary for Florida state attorney for Orange and Osceola counties, was a television analyst during the trial in which Mr. Zimmerman was acquitted. And Kim Foxx was advised by Mr. Crump in her successful primary challenge to Anita Alvarez, the incumbent state’s attorney in Cook County, Ill., who was criticized for her handling of the 2014 fatal police shooting of Laquan McDonald, a black 17-year-old.  Mr. Crump has also worked with the family of Michael Brown, whose fatal shooting by a white police officer in 2014 set off days of unrest in Ferguson, Mo. Mr. Crump said the white prosecutor’s failure to obtain an indictment there led him to believe that black people were being “stripped of their fundamental humanity,” and to seek a new strategy to curb police violence: electing more black district attorneys.  Photo  Finding candidates, however, requires overcoming obstacles. These include a longstanding perception that legal careers in defense and civil rights work were more laudable, said Rashad Robinson, the executive director of Color of Change, a racial justice group whose political action committee has aided the effort. “The role of chief law enforcer for a community is not always the first role many people think of that are reform-minded,” he said.  While cities elect mayors, elected prosecutors typically represent counties, often including majority-white suburbs, “which may have different ideas about what makes sense for criminal justice and law enforcement and safety,” Mr. Robinson said. District attorney posts also do not have natural steppingstones, the way novice politicians can gain experience running for alderman or a seat on the school board. And first-time candidates often must challenge entrenched incumbents who are also their bosses.  Ms. Ayala, who is unopposed in November and is set to become the first black elected prosecutor in Florida history, started out as a prosecutor but became a public defender because she believed too many defendants were receiving inadequate counsel. She returned to the state attorney’s office in 2014 out of frustration with the Zimmerman case. The defense had done everything it could to portray Mr. Martin as a thug, she said, adding that if the prosecution had included an African-American, it might have portrayed him as more sympathetic.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  She said she hoped to address strained relations between many black people and police. “I want to work to fix that,” she said. “While they may not have the shootings, there are a lot of reports and allegations of excessive force.”  What clobbered the man Ms. Ayala unseated, Jeffrey L. Ashton, was $1.4 million from the Florida version of the Safety and Justice political action committees Mr. Soros has bankrolled in one state after another since last year.  “It was like she had a megaphone and I was whispering,” Mr. Ashton said ruefully in an interview. He argued that he and Ms. Ayala barely differed on policy, and bluntly called himself a victim of “racism.”  “The only thing that differentiated my opponent and I was that I’m a white male and she’s a black female,” he said. “You’re basically saying, ‘Well, I have a lot of money and I want a black face in this office, so here’s $1.4 million.’ I just think that’s scary.”  Similarly, more than $700,000 from Illinois Safety and Justice helped carry Ms. Foxx to a primary victory over Ms. Alvarez, a two-term incumbent who was denounced for her handling of the McDonald case, in which a video of the teenager being shot 16 times by police officers was not made public for more than a year.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Ms. Foxx represented foster children as a young lawyer, but saw how prosecutors had the power to remove children from their homes, and decided to become one herself. “All of that discretion lies with the prosecutor,” she said. “If we only have diversity in responding to that, it’s too late.”  Far from promising to keep race out of their decision-making, the new black prosecutors and candidates — like Kimberly Gardner, who won a four-way primary for circuit attorney in St. Louis and is unopposed on Tuesday — are explicitly promising to address issues like disparate incarceration rates and police misconduct.  Photo  And they are drawing on personal experience for lessons on how to be tough on crime without being needlessly harsh.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Ayala, in Florida, said her husband had once been caught up in the juvenile justice system, and later served seven years in prison on drug charges. He now works for a nonprofit. “You have to distinguish between a child who is misguided and frustrated from home issues, and a child who is dangerous,” she said.  The thin ranks of black elected prosecutors do include some high-profile figures. Since the Ferguson protests, R. Seth Williams, the Philadelphia district attorney, has held informal talks with a small group of African-American peers on the best ways to respond to police killings. And it was Marilyn Mosby, the state’s attorney for Baltimore, who led the investigation into the case of Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old black man who died after riding unsecured in a police transport wagon.  Six officers were charged with crimes; the first trial ended in a hung jury, and three officers were acquitted. Ms. Mosby dropped the remaining charges.  But she is unapologetic. Had the case been handled differently, “there would have been no accountability,” she said in an interview. “You have to have a seat at the table, and you have to be the change you want to see.”  A small group of advocates are leading the charge. The National Bar Association has urged black line prosecutors to run for office; the National Black Prosecutors Association is offering to mentor candidates; and Mr. Soros, through Color of Change and his growing network of Safety and Justice PACs, has funneled nearly $5 million into the cause since last year.  Outside Atlanta, Mr. Soros spent $147,000 helping a DeKalb County line prosecutor, Darius Pattillo, seek the district attorney’s post in neighboring Henry County; his general-election opponent recently quit the race.  Not all the campaigns have ended so well for Mr. Soros: Robert Shuler Smith, a black district attorney whom he helped win re-election in Hinds County, Miss., has since been indicted on charges of conspiring to aid a criminal defendant.  And in Houston, Mr. Soros’s first choice, Morris Overstreet — a former judge who was the first African-American elected to a statewide office in Texas since Reconstruction — was defeated in the Democratic primary by a white woman, Kim Ogg. Mr. Soros has now spent $500,000 to aid her against the Republican incumbent, Devon Anderson.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Soros, who declined to be interviewed, has also supported Hispanics seeking prosecutors’ posts in Arizona and New Mexico, a spokesman said.  “Race does not explicitly play a role, but in seeking candidates who understand the injustices of the current system, many of them turn out to be African-American or Latino, because it is people of color who have been disproportionately affected by those injustices,” the spokesman, Michael Vachon, said in an email.  Mr. Crump said he wants to focus attention next on elected prosecutors in Staten Island, Minneapolis, and Baton Rouge, places that have each seen high-profile killings of black men.  But first, Brooklyn voters next year will elect a successor to Ken Thompson, the borough’s first black district attorney, who died of cancer last month before finishing his first term.  In what was apparently his last interview, Mr. Thompson made clear that electing black prosecutors would not just mean charging police officers who might not have been charged before, or declining to seek prison time for blacks who might have been dealt with more harshly in the past.  He pointed to his decisions to stop prosecuting most low-level marijuana cases, create a program aimed at helping people clear warrants for low-level offenses, and devote resources to reversing wrongful convictions. Electing more black district attorneys, he said, might give blacks and the poor a fairer shake.  “We should first determine if those who enter the criminal justice system belong in the criminal justice system — not just sort of process them on,” he said.  “There are a lot of lock-’em-up, keep-’em-moving D.A.s,” he added. “I’m not one of those guys.”
Huma Abedin, the most visible of Mrs. Clinton’s aides and among her most trusted, has become entangled in an F.B.I. investigation of her estranged husband, former Representative Anthony D. Weiner, and his lewd messages.  Photo  Jake Sullivan, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign policy director, has faced questions over whether he mishandled classified information in the course of his round-the-clock email traffic with Mrs. Clinton at the State Department, an issue that could shadow him as he moves into what is expected to be a key White House role, perhaps national security adviser or chief of staff.  Mr. Podesta, who has been with the Clintons since the 1990s and is a candidate for a cabinet post, has been singed by the publication of his private correspondence. So has Neera Tanden, a former domestic policy adviser to Mrs. Clinton, who took an acid pen to some of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides in emails to Mr. Podesta, her friend.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton has plenty of other choices who have been unscathed by the email affairs, including Michèle A. Flournoy, a front-runner for defense secretary, and William J. Burns, who is on a short list for secretary of state.  But allies have long viewed Mrs. Clinton’s dependence on a small handful of aides with deep concern, lamenting the decades-old reluctance of her and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, to eject anyone from their political lives for good.  And the aides closest to her often reinforce her worst instincts, friends say: a lack of transparency, circle-the-wagons defensiveness and paranoia about the news media.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In her campaign, Mrs. Clinton has often strained to balance dueling impulses about her overlapping circles, maintaining a longstanding preference for keeping two layers of staff: a larger, more professionalized group and the smaller one she leans on most.  Sensitive to the perception that she would rely on the same voices that guided her in the Senate and during her tumultuous 2008 presidential bid, Mrs. Clinton asked Robby Mook, 35 at the time, to manage her 2016 campaign, and she recruited a handful of former top aides to President Obama.  Yet as voters weigh whether to return the Clintons to the White House after 16 years away, Mrs. Clinton’s bumpy march to Election Day has assumed a familiar feel — colored by a generation of aides, baggage and aides’ baggage, all attaching to her in seeming perpetuity.  William M. Daley, a former chief of staff to Mr. Obama, said that with the Clintons, two qualities would always predominate in personnel decisions: loyalty and competence. He added that Mrs. Clinton was unlikely to “go out of the box” in her hiring.  “Everybody likes the sort of, ‘Oh gosh, you come in and then you get a fresh team and a whole new outlook.’ That’s a crock of something,” Mr. Daley said about White House transitions. “You dance with the people you came to the dance with.”  Photo  Indeed, when Ms. Abedin disappeared from the campaign trail — relinquishing her perch, at least temporarily, as the ubiquitous protector at Mrs. Clinton’s side — her spot on the campaign plane went to a conspicuous replacement: Philippe Reines, a caustic, canny veteran of Mrs. Clinton’s State Department tenure.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Until that point, Mr. Reines had himself been sidelined with no formal campaign role, though he did play the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, during Mrs. Clinton’s debate preparations. In the WikiLeaks emails, top Clinton staff members portrayed him as a disruptive force.  “One crazy dude,” Mr. Podesta called Mr. Reines last year, in an exchange that appeared to focus on news coverage of his hostile interactions with reporters.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign suggested that the controversies would have no bearing on her decision-making in a transition. “If she wins, Hillary Clinton is going to fill the most critical positions with the most qualified people, period,” said a spokesman, Brian Fallon.  Mr. Reines, Ms. Abedin and Mr. Sullivan, the campaign’s policy director, were Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides at the State Department, their bonds cemented over hundreds of hours of flying time during the 112 trips she made as secretary. Friends and former colleagues of Mrs. Clinton say the three would be likely to play a similar role in the White House — though of the three, only Mr. Sullivan seems a candidate for a major management job.  Each has been badly bruised by email-related disclosures in the last two years. Mr. Sullivan and Ms. Abedin, who corresponded with Mrs. Clinton on sensitive issues at the State Department, were swept up in the F.B.I. investigation into whether Mrs. Clinton mishandled classified information. And even before the WikiLeaks releases, Mr. Reines turned over hundreds of emails with reporters in response to requests made under the Freedom of Information Act.  While Mr. Sullivan and Ms. Abedin were spared legal charges in the investigation of Mrs. Clinton’s private email server, they each had to hire lawyers and endured months of uncertainty about whether they would lose their security clearances.  Friends of Mrs. Clinton express deep frustration with Ms. Abedin and say they wish Mrs. Clinton would distance herself from her and Mr. Weiner. But they expect that Mrs. Clinton’s instinct will be to protect her. Several predicted that Mrs. Clinton would find a place for Ms. Abedin in the White House, perhaps as a senior adviser with an undefined but wide-ranging portfolio, similar to the role Valerie B. Jarrett has played in the Obama White House.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For all their problems, the aides bring valuable skills. At the State Department, Ms. Abedin and Mr. Reines organized Mrs. Clinton’s foreign trips, which generated some of the most favorable news coverage of her career.  Mr. Sullivan, in particular, became indispensable as a policy adviser, a role that helps explain why he sent and received so many of those sensitive emails at the State Department, where he served as both deputy chief of staff and head of the policy planning department.  Photo  Still, if she is elected, Mrs. Clinton is expected to supplement her closest aides with a cadre of professional advisers, similar to those who occupy senior posts in her campaign. How these people will mesh with the inner circle is not clear.  While Mr. Trump’s chaotic bid for the presidency has often served to overshadow potential management issues on Mrs. Clinton’s team, the operation had for most of the year appeared relatively drama-free — at least compared with 2008. But the publication of private emails from the hacked account of Mr. Podesta changed that, even as the campaign sought to remind the public of the trove’s origins — a breach attributed to Russian interference — not its contents.  Still, the documents exposed a predictable, if ugly, trail of personal slights and backbiting that could leave Mrs. Clinton’s staff even more distrustful.  Already, some in Mrs. Clinton’s inner circle have said that the acerbic comments of Ms. Tanden, a former top policy adviser to Mrs. Clinton who is close to Mr. Podesta, are enough to disqualify her from a White House post. (Among the most memorable entries, Ms. Tanden joked that whoever advised Mrs. Clinton to use a private email server as secretary of state should be “drawn and quartered,” laying the blame at the feet of Cheryl D. Mills, a longtime Clinton adviser and lawyer.)  “In this business, you have to develop a tough skin, and you can’t isolate people who might not say what you want to hear,” said Melanne Verveer, Mrs. Clinton’s chief of staff when she was first lady. “I wouldn’t be surprised if some of these people go in.”  At the same time, Ms. Verveer said she expected Mrs. Clinton to reach out to people she did not know well to fill certain positions. “You need to strike a balance,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Much will depend on Mrs. Clinton’s choice of chief of staff. A professional manager like Ron Klain, who has worked for both Mr. Obama and former Vice President Al Gore, would reassure many in Mrs. Clinton’s orbit. As one friend pointed out, Bill Clinton chose a businessman and childhood friend from Arkansas, Thomas F. McLarty, as his first chief of staff, with disappointing results.  Mrs. Clinton has a history of strong-willed chiefs of staff, all of them women, including Maggie Williams and Ms. Verveer in the White House, and Ms. Mills at the State Department. But even Ms. Mills, a diamond-hard lawyer who defended Mr. Clinton during his impeachment trial, at a minimum failed to deter Mrs. Clinton from the decision to use a personal email address for government business.  “Obviously, you need people you fully trust to have your back,” said Lissa Muscatine, a former chief speechwriter for Mrs. Clinton. “But that doesn’t mean you want yes women and yes men.”  There is one other difference between the Hillary Clinton of the 1990s and today’s. As first lady, she surrounded herself with contemporaries: women like Ms. Williams and Ms. Verveer, who had substantial outside experience before working for her.  Now, at 69, Mrs. Clinton is a generation older than most of her aides. Some have worked almost exclusively for her, already confronting a lifetime of political combat in their young careers.  Mr. Daley suggested that having a few battle scars was not a bad thing — to a point.  “Everybody who’s been around for years has baggage,” he said. “Some have more than others.”
But this election, aides say, forced a decision by Mrs. Obama to wade into the muck. In September, while Mr. Trump was in a fight with a former Miss Universe he called “Miss Piggy” and an “eating machine,” Mrs. Obama sat down with her staff and began writing a campaign speech focused on Mr. Trump’s treatment of women.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The more we talked about it, she felt that the debate had become so base that, when it’s time to cover your kids’ ears, it’s gone too far,” Ms. Winter said. “It was time to speak out.”  As Mrs. Obama was putting the finishing touches on the speech, an 11-year-old tape surfaced in which Mr. Trump boasted of grabbing women by their genitals without consent.  The result was a takedown of Mr. Trump that Mrs. Obama delivered in October in New Hampshire, where her voice trembled with emotion as she confided that the misogynistic tenor of the presidential race had “shaken me to my core.”  “Now is the time for all of us to stand up and say enough is enough,” she said. “This has got to stop. Right now.”  The following week, charged up in her new role, Mrs. Obama drew a crowd of 7,000 in Phoenix. “Here’s what I’m asking,” she said, imploring. “Don’t just tweet about my speech last week. If you liked that speech, then go vote. If you want to stand up for yourself and your fellow Americans, then go vote. If you want to get Hillary elected, vote. Vote early! Vote right now!”  Mr. Obama’s political advisers have long regarded his wife as a potent weapon. Their nickname for her in his 2008 campaign was “the closer.” Back then, with Mr. Obama engaged in a bitter Democratic primary against Mrs. Clinton, his aides noticed that Mrs. Obama’s so-called conversion rate — the ratio of voters who registered or signed up to volunteer or otherwise help the campaign after she made an appeal — was exceptionally high.  In part, that is because Mrs. Obama makes a point of telling voters what she expects them to do, like a mother ordering her children to do their homework.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Don’t embarrass me, y’all,” she told voters in Charlotte, N.C., in early October, warning them that she demands the statistics after each campaign stop on how many people registered to vote or signed up to volunteer.  Still, Mrs. Obama knows all too well the darker side of putting herself out in the political arena.  In 2008, she was criticized as angry and unpatriotic after a comment at a rally in Wisconsin about the unexpected success of her husband’s campaign. “Let me tell you something,” she said, in remarks that haunted her throughout the campaign. “For the first time in my adult lifetime, I’m really proud of my country, and not just because Barack has done well, but because I think people are hungry for change.”  Photo  Conservatives who had been pushing racially tinged criticism of Mr. Obama, suggesting that he had been born in Kenya and portraying him as a radical liberal, turned their fire on his wife. A worried Mrs. Obama, who was furious about the racist rumors of her husband, told aides that she might be hurting her husband’s chances, and wondered whether she had been wrong to swallow her misgivings and plunge into the campaign.  “She wasn’t accustomed to this, and she wasn’t used to the criticism, and she became a lightning rod early on in the presidential race,” said David Axelrod, one of Mr. Obama’s closest advisers at the time. “It wasn’t like she was demanding to be out on the campaign trail. We asked her to be out there. And oftentimes, we threw her out there without adequate preparation or staffing.”  Mrs. Obama was livid when a New Yorker magazine cover cartoon in July 2008 pictured her wearing fatigues, combat boots and an Afro and toting a machine gun, fist-bumping with her husband, who was dressed in Middle Eastern garb and a head scarf. The couple was in the Oval Office, where an American flag burned in the fire place.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Before she was well known on the national and international stage, she was caricatured by a few, and that was quite hurtful to her,” said Valerie Jarrett, a longtime confidant of the Obamas who serves as the president’s senior adviser.  The campaign hired Stephanie Cutter, an operative adept at handling political crises, to advise Mrs. Obama on her stump speech, her campaign itinerary and her media appearances.  The change was soon apparent. Mrs. Obama appeared on “The View” and talked about serving her daughters bacon for breakfast and hating to wear pantyhose. She gave an interview to Ladies’ Home Journal about her views on marriage and motherhood. She delivered a speech at the Democratic convention in Denver, where she talked of her working-class roots and called her husband “a great American story,” and — in a subtle attempt to answer her critics — spoke repeatedly of her pride in and love for America.  Her poll numbers shot up more than 10 points, above 50 percent, and by Inauguration Day, they were at 68 percent, according to Gallup’s daily tracking. They have not dipped below 60 percent since.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Obama has often spoken of her dislike for living in the White House. “There are prisonlike elements,” she said in 2013 at a forum with Laura Bush. She added, however, that it was “a really nice prison.”  The fact is, Mrs. Obama has built a comfortable life there. Although family dinner in the residence is seen as sacrosanct, she has often been spotted making low-key escapes with a clique of female friends to the private back room of BLT Steak, an upscale eatery two blocks from the White House, or for martinis and Mediterranean tapas at the restaurant Zaytinya.  She has prowled the sidelines of Sasha’s soccer games, stayed up until the small hours at White House celebrity bashes and ventured to SoulCycle for private lessons with friends and young female aides, sweating in the dark with Secret Service agents on hand to protect her.  Photo  Over their time in the White House, Barack and Michelle Obama have adopted their own memes to explain each other to the public, each with a serrated edge that has the ring of truth.  Mr. Obama’s portrayal is tart: He casts his wife as the real boss in the family, one who has barely tolerated his political aspirations for far longer than she has wanted to, and is always on the brink of cutting him loose. (He told Mr. Kimmel last month that “Michelle would divorce me” if he were able to seek a third term.)  Hers is about a husband who is brilliant but takes himself too seriously and frequently needs an ego-shattering reality check. On “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” in September, Mrs. Obama lowered her voice several octaves to impersonate the president lecturing his daughters on global warming at the dinner table. In 2007, she told Glamour magazine that her husband was “snore-y and stinky” when he awoke in the morning.  Cindi Leive, the editor in chief of Glamour who has worked with the first lady on the “Let Girls Learn” education initiative, recalled editing that first interview and thinking she wanted to know her better.  “That’s exactly the sentiment that much of America has come to have over the last eight years: ‘I need to be friends with this woman,’’’ Ms. Leive said. “‘Why am I not friends with this woman?’ And, then increasingly, ‘I am friends with this woman.’”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Christine Matthews, a Republican pollster who has specialized in studying gender, said Mrs. Obama, by confining herself to popular initiatives as first lady, has built a reservoir of trust and popularity that puts her on the level of a Barbara Bush or Laura Bush, rather than Nancy Reagan or Mrs. Clinton, who were seen as more divisive.  “She could have gone in a really bad direction but didn’t, and she has really evolved,” Ms. Matthews said. “Unfortunately, there are gender lenses when you look at women who have political ambition. The American public doesn’t want that in a first lady. They want someone nice and relatable.”  But as voters greet Mrs. Obama rapturously at campaign events this fall and eagerly chant her slogan, “When they go low, we go high,” speculation has started that she may one day seek office herself. Those close to her regard the prospect as absurd.  “I am certain she does not wish to be in politics herself,” Ms. Jarrett said. “There are very few things I’m as certain of in life.”  One other thing is certain: Republicans, who thought nothing of attacking Mrs. Obama in 2008, now shy away from doing so, a testament to her popularity and appeal.  “We don’t go after the first lady,” Sean Spicer, the communications director for the Republican National Committee, said in July. “Full stop.”
Mr. Trump also began the day in this state, rallying supporters in Tampa, where he recognized Hispanic supporters in his audience and declared “the Cubans just endorsed me,” citing an award he had been given by a group of Cuban-Americans. Without explaining what he meant, Mr. Trump said, “The Hispanic vote is turning out to be much different than people thought.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He also continued to assail Mrs. Clinton over her use of a private email server as secretary of state, highlighting the F.B.I.’s apparent discovery of messages on a computer used by Huma Abedin, a longtime Clinton aide, and her estranged husband, the former congressman Anthony D. Weiner. But, continuing a recent pattern, Mr. Trump hurled claims at Mrs. Clinton that were highly speculative.  “Anthony Weiner has probably every classified email ever sent,” said Mr. Trump. “And, knowing this guy, he probably studied every single one, in between using his machine for other purposes.”  The F.B.I. is investigating whether Mr. Weiner sent sexually explicit text messages to a 15-year-old.  Mr. Trump also stopped on Saturday in North Carolina, and took advantage of the time-zone differences by flying west for evening rallies in Colorado and Nevada.  In Reno, Nev., he was rushed offstage by Secret Service agents after someone shouted that a member of the crowd had a gun, a reminder of the charged atmosphere at many of his events. No weapon was found, and Mr. Trump returned to finish his speech after a few minutes.  By holding events in those four increasingly diverse states, he was signaling a refusal to concede any ground to Mrs. Clinton and rejecting the strategy of past presidential candidates who have fought within the confines of a narrower electoral map in the campaign’s final hours.  He even announced Saturday morning that he planned to add a stop in Minnesota, long a Democratic bulwark and a state he had not been even contesting.  But the evidence from polling and the early voting turnout seemed to indicate he was facing the possibility of sweeping losses in states with sizable Hispanic populations, most likely affected by the racially tinged language he has used since beginning his campaign over 16 months ago, when he claimed the ranks of Mexican migrants were filled with rapists and drug dealers.  Photo  “The story of this election may be the mobilization of the Hispanic vote,” said Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, an anti-Trump Republican who has pleaded with his party to do more to win over Latinos. “So Trump deserves the award for Hispanic turnout. He did more to get them out than any Democrat has ever done.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The question for Republicans, just 12 years after President George W. Bush carried at least a third of the Hispanic vote, is how long the Trump-inflicted damage with Latinos will haunt them.  Raising the specter of how difficult it has been for California Republicans since former Gov. Pete Wilson’s hard line toward illegal immigrants there, Mr. Graham said, “If we don’t come to grips with the demographic challenges we have with Hispanics in presidential politics, we’ll never right the ship.”  In Florida, at least 200,000 more Hispanics had voted early as of Friday than did during the entire early voting period four years ago, according to an analysis by Steve Schale, a Democratic strategist who helped run President Obama’s two campaigns here.  The turnout has been particularly explosive in South Florida and Central Florida, where thousands from Puerto Rico and other regions of Latin America have migrated in recent years. And 24 percent of the Hispanics casting early ballots were first-time voters, the analysis showed.  “It’s the demographics that are bailing her out,” Mr. Schale said.  In Orlando, voters waited up to 90 minutes on Saturday at one early voting location at a library, some spending the time taking pictures of one another in front of candidates’ signs. Parking lots for a quarter-mile surrounding the area were packed.  Mrs. Clinton clearly carried the day there. Jon-Carlos Perez, 30, an independent voter and a concrete laborer originally from Puerto Rico, said he cast his vote for Mrs. Clinton in part because “she’s not an idiot like Trump.”  Alyssa Perez, 23, a doctoral student at the University of Central Florida who voted at another busy location in Orlando, said she considered Mr. Trump to be “anti-women, anti-Hispanic, anti-Muslim” and said, “I don’t want to live in a country where there is a president who has those kinds of views.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Canvassing on Saturday morning in North Miami, Mary Kay Henry, the president of the Service Employees International Union, and a handful of local members focused on households, many of them Haitian or Hispanic, with an infrequent voting history. But nearly every resident who answered their door assured her they had already voted.  “The word is out,” said Ms. Henry, as roosters scooted between yards.  But it was not just Florida where Hispanics were poised to send a powerful message. In Nevada, which has the fastest-growing Latino population in the West, Democrats appeared to have built a fearsome advantage in Las Vegas’s Clark County at the end of early voting Friday, largely because of a surge of votes from Mexican-Americans. The early voting period was extended until 10 p.m. at one Hispanic grocery store in Las Vegas, where the images of hundreds of voters waiting in line ricocheted across the internet. (On Saturday, Mr. Trump claimed, without any evidence, that the hours had been extended so Democrats could be bused in.)  As of the end of early voting on Thursday, five states with surging Hispanic populations — Arizona, Colorado, Florida, North Carolina and Nevada — had already cast ballots equivalent to over 50 percent of their total turnout from 2012, according to an analysis by Catalist, a Democratic data firm.  While the changing face of the American electorate seemed to offer Mrs. Clinton a political cushion, the F.B.I.’s decision to continue investigating her use of a private email server as secretary of state appeared to push some loosely committed white voters away. Mr. Trump has seized on the issue in virtually every speech, repeatedly insinuating that Mrs. Clinton was on the verge of being charged despite no evidence to support the claim.  “She’s under multiple federal investigations, has committed many crimes, including perjury, and she’s now facing the prospect of a federal indictment,” Mr. Trump said as he delivered the Republican Party’s weekly radio address.  And Mr. Trump has been trying to take advantage of Mrs. Clinton’s slippage in mostly white states by making a late incursion into Michigan and Wisconsin.  Acknowledging that Mr. Trump is threatening the grip Democrats have had on Michigan in presidential races since 1988, Mrs. Clinton appeared on Friday in Detroit and planned an event in Grand Rapids for Monday while announcing that Mr. Obama would visit Ann Arbor the same day.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  She appeared in Philadelphia on Saturday night, before heading on Sunday to New Hampshire, and then returning to Ohio, where she was to appear with the Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James in a state Mr. Obama twice captured but has proved elusive for her.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton also dispatched her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine, to Wisconsin and onetime rival, Senator Bernie Sanders, to Iowa over the weekend to blunt Mr. Trump’s support among white voters. A new Des Moines Register poll this weekend showed Mr. Trump leading Mrs. Clinton by seven points in Iowa.  But Mrs. Clinton can afford to lose Ohio and Iowa and even Michigan and still easily amass the 270 electoral votes needed for victory if she is able to secure the Southern and Western states that have tilted away from Republicans as they lost ground with nonwhites over the past decade: Virginia, North Carolina and Florida, as well as New Mexico, Colorado and Nevada.  And while she may not win every one of these diverse states, capturing most of them would be enough to deny Mr. Trump any path to the White House.  “You can credit him for that,” said Karl Rove, the Republican strategist. “Not her.”
“The power and courage of guest room attendants are the foundation and a big source of strength of the Culinary Union,” Bethany Khan, the union’s communications director, says. These workers, she adds, “are the majority of the middle class in Nevada.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Most of the hotels on and around the Strip are union shops, but the one that employs Ms. Vargas has yet to sign a contract. Even though its workers voted to unionize last December, and even though it is violating the law by not coming to the bargaining table — a point reinforced in a decision and order issued on Thursday by the National Labor Relations Board.  So Ms. Vargas wears her back brace, hidden, but also her buttons, prominent.  A wooden rosary draped over the rearview mirror sways as her Jeep wends through a working-class stretch of Las Vegas; this is not where Donny and Marie live. She drops her grandchildren at their school, then goes to the house of a friend from the Dominican Republic. She is standing outside, dressed in the same black and gray.  The Jeep drives deeper into the Vegas peculiarity, past the 7-Elevens and massage parlors, the smoke shops and strip clubs. Soon the casino and hotel giants of the Strip are framing the view, including one that sticks out like a gold tooth in a wicked grin.  This is where Ms. Vargas will clock in at 8:30, and where she is expected to clean a checked-out room in less than 30 minutes and a stay-over in less than 15. Every room seems to reveal something about the human condition.  “Sometimes I open the door, and I say ‘Oh my God,’ ” Ms. Vargas says. “And then I close the door.”  Photo  Despite their name tags, guest room attendants are anonymous. They go unnoticed by many as they push their 300-pound carts to the next room, and the next.  A glimpse of what is expected of these attendants can be found at the Culinary Academy of Las Vegas, a joint venture between the culinary and bartenders unions and many properties along the Strip. Here, people are trained as cooks or baker’s helpers, bus persons or bar apprentices — or guest room attendants.  A corner of the academy’s building features a series of mock guest rooms, each one representing a specific hotel’s style: a Bellagio suite, an MGM Grand, a Caesars Palace. Students learn how to lift mattresses without injuring their backs; how to wear gloves while reaching with care into wastebaskets; and how to maintain quality while moving quickly, because there’s always another room.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Get in and get out,” says Shirley Smith, a former guest room attendant who now trains others.  Consider all the items on that cart. Linens, magazines, water bottles, coffee, toiletries, tissues, glass cleaners, disinfectants, bathrobes, dusters, a vacuum, and assorted brushes, including one for the toilet and one for the crevices around the tub and shower.  Now consider the job itself.  “We make the beds, dust, vacuum, mop, fill the coffee, the creamer, the sugar,” Ms. Vargas says. “We wash the toilet, the bathtub, the shower, the Jacuzzi. Worst, sometimes, is the kitchen. We clean the kitchen.”  All in a half-hour. Nine, 10, 11 times a day.
Mrs. Clinton has sidestepped questions about whether, if she is elected, she intends to keep Mr. Comey in his job. Her surrogates and supporters say firing him, while legal, would be politically impossible.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The political cost of firing him is greater than the political cost of keeping him,” said James M. Cole, who recently served as deputy attorney general and who signed a Clinton campaign letter criticizing Mr. Comey.  That sets the stage for a Clinton presidency that opens with tension in one of the president’s most important relationships. The strain would not be a new one. J. Edgar Hoover, the bureau’s first director, was almost fired by more than a few of the six presidents he served under. More recently, President Bill Clinton and his director, Louis Freeh, were barely on speaking terms.  But such a relationship would be untenable in today’s F.B.I., which since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks has become essential to counterterrorism efforts around the world. That is why people close to Mr. Comey say the next president will move quickly past the rancor of the past few weeks.  “The national security area is one where they will be bound,” said Daniel C. Richman, a close adviser to Mr. Comey who worked with him as a federal prosecutor in New York in the 1980s. “It will be something that will enable them to bond.”  Said another way: A national crisis has a way of making political grievances seem less important.  For now, though, this grievance is particularly raw and there is little historical precedent for it. Incoming presidents have criticized F.B.I. directors before, but rarely so forcefully or publicly. As a candidate, Jimmy Carter said he “would have” fired Clarence M. Kelley, the director at the time, for accepting gifts and services from his staff members. He declined to say, though, whether as president he would indeed fire Mr. Kelley. And he did not.  By contrast, Democrats rallying behind Mrs. Clinton have made a late-campaign strategy out of fueling outrage at the F.B.I. The campaign published an open letter, signed by dozens of former prosecutors, chastising Mr. Comey. President Obama criticized him. The House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, hinted that he might be pushed from office.  “Maybe he’s not in the right job,” Ms. Pelosi told CNN. “I think that we have to just get through this election and just see what the casualties are along the way.”  Mrs. Clinton’s running mate, Senator Tim Kaine, said in an interview on Saturday with Fusion that Mr. Comey had violated F.B.I. protocol by discussing details of an investigation, but that he did not believe Mr. Comey was trying to affect the election.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Kaine said that recent disclosures in the news media showed that “the F.B.I. is not only a leaky sieve but there were people within the F.B.I. actively working — actively working — to try to help the Trump campaign.” He called it “a massive blow to the integrity of” the bureau.  Mr. Comey ignited criticism for announcing, over the objection of the Justice Department, that F.B.I. agents had discovered new emails that might — or might not — be relevant to an investigation that was completed in July into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server to send classified information.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  People close to Mr. Comey say his move could actually help Mrs. Clinton if she wins. Only an independent-minded F.B.I. director, one who has shown no loyalty to Mrs. Clinton and a fierce commitment to transparency, their argument goes, will have the credibility to handle what are sure to be years of accusations of Clinton wrongdoing from Republican lawmakers.  Then there is the matter of Mrs. Clinton’s family foundation. Keeping accusations about the foundation in the news has been a key Republican strategy to weaken Mrs. Clinton, and the F.B.I. office in New York began a preliminary investigation into it over the summer. Some agents there believe strongly that there is evidence to move forward with subpoenas, a move that has been on hold as part of longstanding policy to not do anything that could influence an election — a policy officials say Mr. Comey violated.  After the election, however, authorities will most likely revisit that decision. Senior F.B.I. and Justice Department officials, including Mr. Comey, have characterized the evidence — and the investigation — as weak, according to several law enforcement officials familiar with the case. They see the case as based on little more than information from “Clinton Cash,” a book by Peter Schweizer that asserted that foreign entities gave money to former President Bill Clinton and the Clinton Foundation, and in return received favors from the State Department.  F.B.I. agents, like many law enforcement officers, are often conservative-leaning. And many of today’s agents came up in the bureau during the 1990s, an era of special prosecutors and mutual distrust between the Clinton White House and the F.B.I. Institutionally, though, the F.B.I. prides itself on nonpartisanship. It investigates public corruption in both parties with equal zeal and has rules and traditions that protect against partisan meddling.  Mr. Comey’s move, and the series of news stories that followed about politically charged investigations, have led to accusations that those rules and traditions had been cast aside.  When the F.B.I. last week published 15-year-old documents about, among other things, President Clinton’s pardon of the financier Marc Rich, the redacted records offered little information but renewed discussion of long-ago Clinton-related controversies, F.B.I. officials said the timing was a coincidence; the requests for the documents had been filed months ago. But it seemed to confirm the suspicions among Democrats that the F.B.I. was out to hurt Mrs. Clinton, a suggestion F.B.I. agents bristle at.  Mr. Comey has sought to position himself as a fiercely independent director who is willing to speak his mind on issues of race, policing and encryption, even when his views are not shared at the Justice Department or the White House. The result has been a much higher profile for Mr. Comey than that of his predecessor, Robert Mueller, as well as for his more low-key boss, Attorney General Loretta Lynch.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Many current and former Justice Department officials expressed dismay that Ms. Lynch did not personally call Mr. Comey and order him, on principle, not to disclose the latest investigative steps in the email case so close to the election.  There has been some speculation that Mr. Comey would feel compelled to provide details on the status of the investigation into the new cache of emails before Election Day. But that move, which would have been controversial within the F.B.I., is now unlikely.  “Damn the election,” said James McJunkin, a former F.B.I. assistant director, echoing the feeling of other agents. “He has to conduct the investigation without the politics. That’s the important piece. That is something he already knows. That’s not lost on James Comey.”
Video  RENO, Nev. — In a startling scene, Donald J. Trump was rushed offstage by members of his Secret Service detail during a rally on Saturday night in Reno, Nev., after a person in the crowd shouted that someone had a gun.  A man thought to have the gun was apprehended, but no weapon was found, the Secret Service said, and the man was released. Reporters from The Guardian and KRNV, a Reno television station, who interviewed the man reported on Twitter that he had been holding a “Republicans Against Trump” sign.  It was Mr. Trump’s next to last rally in a long day that began in Tampa, Fla., as he makes his final arguments to voters before Tuesday’s election. More than a half-hour into his speech, he noticed a disturbance in the crowd in front of him. “We have one of those guys from the Hillary Clinton campaign,” he told the crowd. “How much are you being paid, fifteen hundred?”  About 30 seconds later, he gazed out into the crowd at another commotion from the same area.  One attendee, Donald Newton, told The Reno Gazette-Journal that he had witnessed a man holding a sign and approaching the stage.  Photo  “He had something on his belly — I don’t know what it was,” Mr. Newton said. “Somebody yelled ‘gun,’ and everyone jumped on him.”  Just then, two members of Mr. Trump’s security detail raced toward the Republican presidential nominee, and one of them grabbed him and forcibly escorted him away from the lectern.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Go!” yelled the second agent.  With Mr. Trump off the stage, some in the crowd in the Reno-Sparks Convention Center grew confused and panicked.  “What’s going on?” asked one woman, leaning over the metal barricades to inquire if the news media had any information. “Are we in danger?”  A few minutes later, Mr. Trump returned and indirectly addressed the matter.  “Nobody said it would be easy for us,” he said. “But we will never be stopped. Never. Ever.”  Rallies for both Mr. Trump and his opponent, Hillary Clinton, are protected by multiple layers of security, including metal detectors and officers searching bags at every entrance.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump’s rallies frequently attract protesters, and Saturday was not the first time that Mr. Trump’s security agents had sensed a potential threat and raced to his side. In March, a group of Secret Service agents rushed onstage and formed a protective ring around the candidate during a rally in Ohio, after an audience member ran toward him. Moments later, the agents left the stage and Mr. Trump resumed his speech.  Despite the Secret Service’s assurance that no gun had been found, the speaker who gave the invocation at Mr. Trump’s final rally of the day, in Denver, asserted that the candidate had been in grave danger and that the news media was to blame.  “Tonight I think the hate a lot of the media raised against him caused an attempt of murder against him in Nevada,” he said.
The final week of the 2016 presidential race has seen a blitz of television ads in swing states, with more than $86 million in airtime reserved by the campaigns and their allies. Both campaigns are airing ads devoted to winning over women.  THE CLINTON AD Hillary Clinton’s campaign is once again using Donald J. Trump’s own words to paint him in a negative light. A new commercial, titled “What He Believes,” features the Republican nominee insulting women in interviews, making lewd and degrading comments, saying that allowing a wife to work is “a very dangerous thing,” and bragging about walking into beauty pageant changing rooms while contestants were nude.  The ad, which is accompanied by melancholy piano music, ends with text overlaying a darkened photo of Mr. Trump, changing from “Anyone who believes,” to “Anyone who says,” to “Anyone who does what he does is unfit to be president.”  THE MESSAGE The Clinton campaign has spent millions of dollars on advertisements conveying a similar message, but none as direct as this one, which explicitly links Mr. Trump’s history of vulgar and demeaning comments to his fitness for office.  THE TAKEAWAY Voters have for months seen and heard Mr. Trump’s controversial comments highlighted on their television screens. But the Clinton campaign is trying to make sure these comments are at the forefront of voters’ minds as they cast early vote ballots or head to the polls on Election Day.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  THE TRUMP AD Ivanka Trump, Mr. Trump’s eldest daughter, is perhaps his most effective surrogate when it comes to humanizing him. She begins the ad speaking directly to the camera, introducing Mr. Trump as a man who is famous, yet unknown. As she cites her father’s “strength and ability,” he is shown in Mexico, standing across from President Enrique Peña Nieto. When she attests to his “kindness and greatness of heart,” he is shown on the campaign trail, handing out goods to flood-ravaged areas and attending a church service.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The ad closes with a promise from Ms. Trump that her father “will fight for you, all the time, every time.”  THE MESSAGE The Trump campaign hopes to portray the candidate as a man with more depth than the caricature depicted by the Clinton campaign.  THE TAKEAWAY The majority of Mr. Trump’s ads are either stark contrasts with Mrs. Clinton or soaring shots of his large crowds and broad boasts. Using his daughter to make his case, the campaign is trying to cast the candidate in a more palatable light to reach out to the women and more moderate voters he desperately needs.  Changing channels …  Animation inauguration  It’s rare to see a political ad that is entirely animated, given the expense and time required. But a new ad from Future45, the Ricketts family’s pro-Trump “super PAC,” steals an opening from “The Simpsons,” imagining the day the Clintons move into the White House — “with all the Clinton baggage, too.” Cartoon movers struggle with boxes labeled “Whitewater” and “Benghazi,” while F.B.I. cars roll up the long driveway. The ad closes with a laundry list of allegations against the Clintons, complete with a selfie-taking Anthony D. Weiner. The ad, part of a last-minute, $25 million blitz from the group, will air during “Saturday Night Live.”  Numbers  $21.3 MILLION in presidential advertising reserved for the final week in Florida.  $1.017 BILLION spent in the primary and general election presidential campaigns.
Photo  I asked Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, for his thoughts about why there were so few elected black prosecutors across the country.  He had other ideas.  We spoke by phone on the morning of Sept. 13. He did not mention that he was sick with cancer, and I had no way of knowing. On Oct. 4, Mr. Thompson, 50, announced his illness. Five days later, he was dead.  Our interview was supposed to last 15 or 20 minutes. But Mr. Thompson kept going off on tangents. In retrospect, I am glad I did not try to stop him.  Some of what he told me would be familiar to anyone who had listened to his campaign speeches: how he was shaped by growing up in public housing and by his mother, a police officer who raised him by herself.  “That’s my life story,” he said. “That’s what God had me go through on this journey.”  He also hinted that he feared being misunderstood in his pursuit to be both tough on police brutality and fair to officers who made mistakes.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  I know now that our interview was his last with any journalist — and that Mr. Thompson was making the case for his legacy.  “Most D.A.s, like most other people in law enforcement,” he said, “if they say that their life experiences don’t matter and, when they get to the job, there’s nothing in their life experiences that pull them to think one way or another — I just don’t think that’s true.”  His mother taught him about fairness, he said. He wanted to bring reform to Brooklyn, because “aspects of the criminal justice system are fundamentally unfair.”  Being elected district attorney was only the beginning. He said he was trying to make changes in Kings County by recruiting lawyers from all walks of life.  “I’m proud of that,” he said. “I’m not just talking the talk, but walking the walk. It’s who I am hiring: Diverse, diverse people, who may not have been put on before, are being given a chance to become prosecutors in Brooklyn. I’m not just talking. I’m making it happen.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  I asked Mr. Thompson about the case of Peter Liang, a police officer who fatally shot a black man, Akai Gurley, in the stairway of a public housing building. Mr. Liang was convicted of second-degree manslaughter and sentenced to probation and community service. Some officers were angry at Mr. Thompson for pursuing the case; Mr. Gurley’s family was angry at him for recommending no jail time for Mr. Liang.  Mr. Thompson’s spokeswoman, listening to the call, interjected, trying to steer him away from the subject, but he rebuffed her.  “No, no, I know it’s on the table,” he said. “I approached that case with a determination to get justice. The problem is, these cops often are not prosecuted. And people forget also, in all the criticism of me, that I did the Abner Louima trial with Loretta Lynch. I did the opening statement for the United States government, and helped convict Justin Volpe, who got 30 years and is still in prison now. And so when it comes to police brutality, I’m adamant.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He had made his name as a federal prosecutor in the case of Mr. Louima, a Haitian immigrant tortured with a broomstick while in custody at a Brooklyn police station in 1997.  Nearly two decades later, as district attorney, he sought the convictions of two officers who knocked out a teenager’s teeth and were captured on video doing it. And he recommended a three-month sentence for an officer who stomped on the head of a man being arrested, he said, “because that was a blatant act of police brutality.”  As we talked, Mr. Thompson listed his proudest accomplishments: his decision not to prosecute most low-level marijuana arrests in Brooklyn, even as the police continued to make them; the establishment of a juvenile court, in partnership with the city courts and the police, to help young people charged with minor offenses avoid criminal records; and a program that invited city residents to clear open arrest warrants for petty crimes without going to court.  Yet nothing evidently gave him more pleasure than the unit he had set up to reverse miscarriages of justice.  “In two years and eight months, we have vacated 21 wrongful convictions,” Mr. Thompson said. “Twenty-one.” All of the defendants were black or Hispanic, he added. “Now, I don’t know any D.A. who is doing it like that.”  He stressed that the exoneration cases had been carefully chosen. “We are not flipping a coin,” he said. “It is still a rigorous, fair, thorough investigation that we take. But I am not going to be a coward, in any way, from doing what I think is right. And I think that one of the biggest things that represents my determination to make a difference is my work with wrongful convictions.”  Our conversation was winding down, but Mr. Thompson seemed to feel as he had just gotten started.  He told me about Paul Gatling, 81, who had been convicted of murder in 1964. In May, prosecutors from Mr. Thompson’s office had his conviction vacated and his name cleared. Among other things, Mr. Gatling’s voting rights were to be restored.  “He sent me a note, and the note said, ‘Done wrong in 1964. Done right in May 2016,’” Mr. Thompson said. “That note was so meaningful to me that I put it on my wall in my office, with a picture of Mr. Gatling crying, holding his cane. Because I think that’s what prosecutors should do. And I’m one of the few prosecutors in the country to do it. I feel good.”
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court issued an order on Saturday allowing Arizona to enforce a law banning so-called ballot harvesting, in which others collect voters’ completed absentee ballots and submit them to election officials. The court’s two-sentence order stayed a ruling from the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit that would have temporarily blocked the law.  The justices gave no reasons for reviving the law, but the court often views last-minute changes to election procedures with disfavor.  Arizona allows voters to submit absentee ballots by mail or in person. The challenged law, enacted this year, barred letting others collect the ballots, with exceptions for family members and caregivers. According to officials in Arizona, there are similar laws in 26 other states and nearly identical ones in “14 other states that make mass ballot collection in some form a felony.”  A Democratic group challenged the Arizona law, saying it placed an unlawful burden on the right to vote and disproportionately affected minority voters, notably Native Americans. A divided three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit refused to block the law, reasoning that it placed a minimal burden on the right to vote while advancing the state’s interests in “preserving ballot secrecy and preventing undue influence, fraud, ballot tampering and voter intimidation.”  In dissent, Chief Judge Sidney R. Thomas said Arizona had “criminalized one of the most popular and effective methods by which minority voters cast their ballots.” He said, for instance, that Native American voters in rural areas often did not have ready access to reliable transportation or to the postal system and so relied on ballot collectors.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The full Ninth Circuit agreed to rehear the case, scheduling arguments in January. In the meantime, on Friday, it blocked the law by a 6-to-5 vote.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  State officials and the Arizona Republican Party filed an emergency application for a stay in the Supreme Court, saying the Ninth Circuit should not have acted so close to the election. “At this late stage in an election cycle,” their brief said, “emotions and rushed judgment typically have no place and should be strongly avoided.”  In response, the challengers said that “thousands of voters have come to rely upon neighbors, friends, organizers, activists and campaigns to collect and hand deliver their voted early ballots, to ensure that they safely arrive by 7 p.m. on Election Day, as required by Arizona law.”  They added that “there is not a shred of evidence linking ballot collection to voter fraud.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, told Congress on Sunday that he had seen no evidence in a recently discovered trove of emails to change his conclusion that Hillary Clinton should face no charges over her handling of classified information.  Mr. Comey’s announcement, just two days before the election, was an effort to clear the cloud of suspicion he had publicly placed over her presidential campaign late last month when he alerted Congress that the F.B.I. would examine the emails.  “Based on our review, we have not changed our conclusions that we expressed in July with respect to Secretary Clinton,” Mr. Comey wrote in a letter to the leaders of several congressional committees. He said agents had reviewed all communications to and from Mrs. Clinton in the new trove from when she was secretary of state.  The letter was a dramatic final twist in a tumultuous nine days for both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Comey, who drew widespread criticism for announcing that the F.B.I. had discovered new emails that might be relevant to its investigation of Mrs. Clinton, which ended in July with no charges. That criticism of Mr. Comey from both parties is likely to persist after the election.  While the new letter was clear as it related to Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Comey’s message was otherwise vague. He did not say that agents had completed their review of the emails, or that they were abandoning the matter in regard to her aides. But federal law enforcement officials said that they considered the review of emails related to Mrs. Clinton’s server complete, and that Mr. Comey’s letter was intended to convey that.  One senior law enforcement official said that as recently as Friday, it was not clear whether the review would be completed by Election Day. But after days of working in shifts around the clock, teams of counterintelligence agents and technology specialists at the bureau’s headquarters in Washington finished their examination of the thousands of emails. Officials had decided to make their decision public as soon as they had reached it, to avoid any suggestion that they were suppressing information.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  According to the law enforcement official, many of the emails were personal messages or duplicates of ones that the bureau had previously examined during the original inquiry.  Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, said in a post on Twitter that the campaign had always believed she would be cleared of any wrongdoing.  “We were always confident nothing would cause the July decision to be revisited,” Mr. Fallon said. “Now Director Comey has confirmed it.”  Kellyanne Conway, Donald J. Trump’s campaign manager, lamented the fact that Mr. Comey had again inserted himself into the election, but she predicted that his conclusion would have no effect on the outcome.  “The investigation has been mishandled from the beginning,” Ms. Conway said on MSNBC, arguing that Mrs. Clinton had wasted taxpayer money and federal resources because of her email practices. “She was reckless, she was careless, she was selfish.”  The new review began after agents discovered a cache of emails in early October in an unrelated investigation into the disgraced former congressman Anthony D. Weiner, the estranged husband of one of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides. When searching Mr. Weiner’s laptop for evidence of whether he had exchanged illicit messages with a teenage girl, they discovered emails belonging to the aide, Huma Abedin.  That announcement renewed talk of an investigation that had shadowed Mrs. Clinton for much of the Democratic primary campaign. She and her aides had been under investigation for improperly storing classified information on Mrs. Clinton’s private email server. The discovery of new emails raised the prospect that the laptop might have new information that would renew the F.B.I. inquiry.  Federal law enforcement officials had said for the past week that only something astounding would change their conclusion that nobody should be charged. But the mere potential for legal trouble was enough to make Republicans gleeful, and Mr. Trump highlighted the F.B.I.’s actions in campaign ads.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the end of a rocky week for Mrs. Clinton that included wild, false speculation about looming indictments and shocking discoveries in the emails, Mr. Comey’s letter swept away her largest and most immediate problem.  Republicans immediately accused Mr. Comey of making his announcement prematurely. “Comey must be under enormous political pressure to cave like this and announce something he can’t possibly know,” Newt Gingrich, a Trump adviser, wrote on Twitter.  Mr. Comey’s move is also sure to prompt questions from Democrats. Most important among them: Why did Mr. Comey raise the specter of wrongdoing before agents had even read the emails, especially since it took only days to determine that they were not significant?  Just hours before Mr. Comey sent the letter to Capitol Hill, Senate Democrats said hearings should be held to examine how Mr. Comey had handled the matter. After the letter’s release, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the Justice Department “needs to take a look at its procedures to prevent similar actions that could influence future elections.”  “There’s no doubt that it created a false impression about the nature of the agency’s inquiry,” she added.  The F.B.I. director’s vague, brief announcement on Oct. 28 left Mrs. Clinton with few details to rebut and little time to do it. Many current and former F.B.I. agents and Justice Department officials said Mr. Comey had needlessly plunged the F.B.I. into the politics of a presidential election, with no clear way out.  A long list of former Justice Department officials, including Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., chided Mr. Comey. Despite the fact that the bureau did not find anything that changed its original conclusion about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Comey has insisted that he had no choice but to inform Congress about the new emails because the investigation had been completed and he had pledged transparency, according to senior F.B.I. officials.  Because of Mr. Comey’s Oct. 28 letter, Attorney General Loretta Lynch made completing a review of the emails a top priority. Late last month, Mr. Comey ordered agents to work around the clock to sift through the messages. That process, senior F.B.I. officials said, was painstaking, because each message that had been sent to Mrs. Clinton had to be reviewed to determine whether it had sensitive national security materials.  In Mr. Comey’s short letter to Congress on Sunday, he said he was “very grateful to the professionals at the F.B.I. for doing an extraordinary amount of high-quality work in a short period of time.”
But moments later, his resolve had collapsed. He allowed the same reporter onto his plane for a flight from Miami to Jacksonville, Fla.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In the final days of the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump’s candidacy is a jarring split screen: the choreographed show of calm and confidence orchestrated by his staff, and the neediness and vulnerability of a once-boastful candidate now uncertain of victory.  On the surface, there is the semblance of stability that is robbing Hillary Clinton of her most potent weapon: Mr. Trump’s self-sabotaging eruptions, which have repeatedly undermined his candidacy. Underneath that veneer, turbulence still reigns, making it difficult for him to overcome all of the obstacles blocking his path to the White House.  The contrasts pervade his campaign. Aides to Mr. Trump have finally wrested away the Twitter account that he used to colorfully — and often counterproductively — savage his rivals. But offline, Mr. Trump still privately muses about all the ways he will punish his enemies after Election Day, including a threat to fund a “super PAC” with vengeance as its core mission.  His polished older daughter, Ivanka, sat for a commercial intended to appeal to suburban women who have recoiled from her father’s incendiary language. But she discouraged the campaign from promoting the ad in news releases, fearing that her high-profile association with the campaign would damage the businesses that bear her name.  Video  Mr. Trump’s campaign is no longer making headlines with embarrassing staff shake-ups. But that has left him with a band of squabbling and unfireable advisers, with confusing roles and an inability to sign off on basic tasks. A plan to encourage early voting in Florida went unapproved for weeks.  The result is chaotic. Advisers cut loose from the campaign months ago, like Corey Lewandowski, still talk to the candidate frequently, offering advice that sometimes clashes with that of the current leadership team. Mr. Trump, who does not use a computer, rails against the campaign’s expenditure of tens of millions on digital ads, skeptical that spots he never sees could have any effect.  Not even staff members who volunteer to be dismissed are let go. The senior communications adviser, Jason Miller, offered to resign after he was spotted at a Las Vegas strip club the night before the final presidential debate. The offer was rejected.  This inside account of the Trump campaign’s final stretch is based on interviews with dozens of aides, operatives, supporters and advisers, many of whom were granted anonymity to describe moments and conversations that were intended to be confidential.    Photo  Hope Hicks, Mr. Trump’s spokeswoman, said the campaign was on course and gaining ground. She firmly rejected suggestions that advisers were clashing, and said voters were responding to Mr. Trump’s message.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Hicks denied that Ms. Trump had misgivings about promoting the ad in which she appeared. “That’s simply not true,” Ms. Hicks said. “Ivanka is totally supportive.”  Falling Into Despair  The closing phase of Mr. Trump’s campaign has been punctuated by swaying poll numbers and dizzying mood swings. It started on Oct. 7 with the release of a recording in which Mr. Trump was caught bragging about forcibly kissing women and grabbing their genitals.  Many Republicans decided that Mr. Trump’s already shaky campaign was over. Some despondent young staff members at the Republican National Committee on Capitol Hill, who usually work late into the night in the final stretches of a campaign, took to leaving their desks early, in time for happy hour at bars. They complained that Mr. Trump had not just lost the election but was dragging down House and Senate candidates, dooming the entire party.  Photo  Mr. Trump’s aides were just as thrown by the tape. But they saw a chance to salvage his candidacy — on a Civil War battlefield.  His aides outlined 15 bullet points for him to deliver during an Oct. 22 speech in Gettysburg, Pa., to focus voters on a new theme of cleaning up government, even as several women came forward to accuse him of groping them just as he had described in the recording.  But Mr. Trump grew frustrated with the instructions. By the time he was done revising the proposed speech, only about a half-dozen of the original suggestions remained. And over the firm objections of his top advisers, he insisted on using the occasion to issue a remarkable threat: that he would sue all of the women who had gone public with the accusations.  As the advisers begged him to reconsider — it would make him seem small, they warned, and undermine a pivotal speech — Mr. Trump was adamant. There had to be a severe penalty for those who dared to attack him, he said. He could not just sit back and let these women “come at me,” he told one of them.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The speech was roundly criticized and seemed strikingly out of place on such sacred and historic ground. “The Grievanceburg Address,” one journalist deemed it.  Mr. Trump fell into despair, and the gloom already enveloping the Republican political class started to infect his campaign.  On Oct. 23, he learned that an ABC News poll showed him trailing Mrs. Clinton by 12 points. He lashed out, becoming so agitated that his aides planned to confront the network about its calculations and accuse ABC of bias, according to internal emails.  “Do they think Republicans and Trump supporters are not going to vote?” one of Mr. Trump’s pollsters, John McLaughlin, wrote to the group. “Or is this an intentional effort to suppress Trump turnout?”  They pressed the network on its methods, but other polls delivered similarly grim news.  An Injection of Hope  Then came an astonishing development. On Oct. 28, the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, announced that his agency would review newly discovered emails potentially pertinent to its investigation of Mrs. Clinton’s private server.  On an afternoon flight to New Hampshire, Mr. Trump and his aides saw the news splash across the giant flat-screen television on his plane.  Mr. Trump was unsure how to respond.  “What do you think this means?” he asked the small circle traveling with him — Stephen K. Bannon, his campaign’s chief executive; Stephen Miller, his senior policy adviser; and Mr. Lewandowski, his former campaign manager, who lives in New Hampshire.  To the assembled men sitting in white leather seats, the answer was simple: It could turn the election around.  But they insisted that to truly exploit it, Mr. Trump needed to do something he had been incapable of in the past: strictly follow instructions, let a story unfold on its own and resist the urge to endlessly bludgeon his rival.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They headed to a fleet of cars that whisked them to the Radisson Hotel in downtown Manchester, where a crowd of thousands was waiting for the candidate to take the stage.  But his aides needed time to sketch out what Mr. Trump should say — and not say. They sent Michael T. Flynn, a retired Army lieutenant general, onstage with a mission: stall.  As the aides agonized over which words to feed into the teleprompter, they become so engrossed that a hot light set up next to the machine caused Mr. Bannon’s Kuhl hiking pants to begin smoldering.  “I think my pant leg is on fire,” he said after noticing the acrid smell.  At the rally, Mr. Trump did as he was told, quickly praising the F.B.I. and warning that Mrs. Clinton could not be permitted to “take her criminal scheme into the Oval Office.” Then, improbably, he moved on.  For the next week, his staff deployed a series of creative tricks to protect its boss from his most self-destructive impulses.  Several advisers warned him that he risked becoming like a wild animal chasing its prey so zealously that it raced over a cliff — a reminder that he could pursue his grievances and his eagerness to fling insults, but that the cost would be a plunge into an electoral abyss.  Taking away Twitter turned out to be an essential move by his press team, which deprived him of a previously unfiltered channel for his aggressions.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Thursday, as his plane idled on the tarmac in Miami, Mr. Trump spotted Air Force One outside his window. As he glowered at the larger plane, he told Ms. Hicks, his spokeswoman, to jot down a proposed tweet about President Obama, who was campaigning nearby for Mrs. Clinton.  “Why is he campaigning instead of creating jobs and fixing Obamacare?” Mr. Trump said. “Get back to work.” After some light editing — Ms. Hicks added “for the American people” at the end — she published it.  Mr. Bannon, his rumpled campaign chief and a calming presence to the candidate, tried a different approach: appealing to Mr. Trump’s ego and competitive side by suggesting that the Clintons were looking to rattle him.  Photo  “They want to get inside your head,” Mr. Bannon told him. “It’s a trap.”  Of course, it was not easy to keep Mr. Trump focused. He chafed at his advisers’ request that he use a seemingly canned line in a speech — a call to curb government corruption by “draining the swamp” in Washington.  But he finally gave in when he saw the crowd reaction, explaining that even Frank Sinatra disliked one of his biggest songs, “My Way.”  ‘I’m Going to Win’  Mr. Trump still clings to certain prerogatives, such as personally approving every commercial before it reaches a TV screen. During a recent four-hour flight, Mr. Trump painstakingly reviewed a new batch of ads on an aide’s laptop and seized on the smallest details.  He objected to a short clip in one ad that showed him emerging from a hug with a female supporter, worrying that it made him seem dismissive rather than warm.  “It looks like I’m repelling away,” Mr. Trump complained. The ad was fixed.  Over all, though, he seemed pleased by the results, as polls started to tighten and his news media coverage changed. Aboard his plane on Thursday, he seemed struck by an unfamiliar trend: News stories emphasized the intended message of his campaign rallies, not his improvised rants or stray tweets.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “All my quotes are coming from my speeches,” he said. “And that’s a good thing.”  Of course, a few days of good behavior cannot erase 16 months of erratic conduct, and aides acknowledge that their efforts to steer a straight course may falter.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  And they know that his chances of winning the election are iffy: Perhaps their best hope, the F.B.I. inquiry into Mrs. Clinton’s email server, fizzled on Sunday with no charges or revelations. But they maintain that there is unseen money and muscle behind Mr. Trump’s political operation — and a level of sophistication that outsiders, and people who have run traditional campaigns, cannot fully appreciate.  At times, however, that is hard to detect. Over a cheeseburger, fried calamari and an “Ivanka Salad” at the Trump Grill in the basement of Trump Tower last week, several aides flipped open a laptop and loaded the popular website 270towin.com, which allows users to create their own winning electoral maps.  For 10 minutes, they clicked through the country, putting Democratic-leaning states won by Mr. Obama four years ago, like New Mexico and Colorado, into Mr. Trump’s column.  Their analysis seemed more atmospheric than scientific.  “You can go to Pennsylvania,” the campaign’s digital director, Brad Parscale, said, referring to a state that polls show favors Mrs. Clinton. “You can almost slice the excitement with a knife. You can feel it in the air there.”  And even as early-voting returns indicated a surge for Mrs. Clinton, they tried to reassure themselves, over and over, that nobody finishes stronger than Mr. Trump, comparing the wisdom of his political judgments to Babe Ruth pointing his bat to the stands to predict where he would hit a home run.  Back on his plane, heading into the campaign’s final weekend, Mr. Trump reclined in his leather chair and refused to entertain any suggestions that his unorthodox, unpredictable and now uncertain campaign for the presidency would end in defeat.  “I’m going to win,” he said.
Mrs. Clinton has delivered a broad message of national unity in the campaign’s closing days, offering herself to voters as an avatar of tolerance and reconciliation, in contrast to Mr. Trump. She campaigned on Sunday in New Hampshire with Khizr Khan, the father of an Army captain slain in Iraq, whose speech in July castigating Mr. Trump as biased against Muslims and immigrants electrified the Democratic National Convention. Mr. Khan branded Mr. Trump as a figure of exclusion and division, asking of him, rhetorically: “Would anyone who is not like you have a place in your America?”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump, for his part, warned voters that they would never again see a candidate like him within reach of the presidency. At a rally in Sioux City, Iowa, he said repeatedly that he represented a “last chance” for voters angry about trade and immigration.  “The media, Wall Street and the politicians are trying to stop us because they know we will fix the rigged system,” he said.  The announcement from James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, reaffirming his assessment that Mrs. Clinton should not be charged with a crime over her handling of classified information, came as a blow to Mr. Trump and other Republicans hoping that a pre-election bombshell would upend Mrs. Clinton’s campaign.  As it stands, Mrs. Clinton appears to be entering Election Day as a solid if not overwhelming favorite, even as the race has narrowed over the past few weeks. A poll published Sunday by NBC News and The Wall Street Journal found her ahead of Mr. Trump by four percentage points nationally, and she maintains a clear upper hand in the Electoral College.  And Mrs. Clinton appears to be benefiting from a surge in participation by Latino voters as well as unusually high enthusiasm among women. Early voting by Latinos may have already given Mrs. Clinton a decisive lead in the swing state of Nevada, as well as a meaningful edge in Florida, a state without which Mr. Trump has no path to the presidency.  Mrs. Clinton and her leading surrogates have also been making a last-minute appeal asking voters to embrace the idea of a female president, seeking to increase her lead among women and to persuade some hesitant men to discard their reservations about Mrs. Clinton’s gender.  Campaigning in Florida over the weekend, Mr. Kaine accused Mr. Trump of tapping into sexism as a political tactic. He reproached Mr. Trump for saying at a rally that military officers would not want to follow orders from Mrs. Clinton, and for suggesting that she did not look presidential.  In Wisconsin on Sunday, Mr. Kaine hailed the historic nature of Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy and urged confident Democrats not to take victory for granted.  Photo  “If it had been easy for there to be a woman president of the United States, there would have been a woman president of the United States,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Clinton campaign also booked national airtime during football games on Sunday night to run a pair of commercials featuring men who said they could not vote for Mr. Trump because of his treatment of women.  And Mrs. Clinton campaigned this weekend with two singers, Katy Perry and Beyoncé, who have hailed her as a barrier-breaking candidate.  In some respects, the campaign of encouragement and reassurance echoes the Democrats’ successful push in 2008 to ease any hesitation about Barack Obama among white voters. That year, prominent white men in the party — including Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, now the vice president, and Richard L. Trumka, an A.F.L.-C.I.O. executive — made intensive efforts to bring along reluctant white voters.  Stephanie Schriock, the president of Emily’s List, a group that supports female Democratic candidates, said it had been important for leaders like President Obama and Mr. Kaine to speak directly to voters who “may still feel hesitant” about electing a woman.  Photo  Ms. Schriock said Mr. Kaine and Mr. Obama had also helped send the message to wavering men that Mr. Trump’s treatment of women was “not normal behavior.”  Tom Bonier, a Democratic data strategist and the chief executive of the firm TargetSmart, said there was ample evidence that women were “especially motivated to vote in this election.” He added that enthusiasm from female voters alone could push Mrs. Clinton’s final vote tally a point above where she stands in public polls.  “In every single battleground state, women not only make up a clear majority of ballots cast thus far, but the female share of the electorate is larger than it was in the 2012 election,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Female voters may play an especially influential role in a few states Mr. Trump is targeting late in the campaign, including Pennsylvania, Michigan and Minnesota, where there are fewer nonwhite voters and Mrs. Clinton’s lead depends in part on white women in the suburbs.  Mr. Trump has increasingly staked his candidacy on long-shot states in the Upper Midwest that have not voted Republican in a generation or more, in an attempt to escape the backlash against his candidacy from Latino voters in more diverse swing states.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  He was competing at a frenzied pace on Sunday, with events planned in five states and stretching well into the night as he fell behind schedule. But with the exception of Iowa, where he is ahead in the polls, Mr. Trump is competing on unfriendly turf, scrounging for support in unlikely areas like liberal-leaning Minneapolis and the prosperous suburbs of Northern Virginia.  While Mrs. Clinton has campaigned with an eye toward turning out specific voter groups in crucial states — firing up black voters in North Carolina and Latinos in South and Central Florida, for instance — Mr. Trump has crisscrossed a wider map of states, but he has done little to attract support beyond his mostly white, less educated political base.  In Minneapolis, home to a sizable population of immigrants, Mr. Trump railed against refugees coming into the United States and singled out Minnesota’s Somali community for attack.  Mr. Trump’s campaign drew criticism over the weekend for releasing a two-minute closing advertisement that cast Mr. Trump as an opponent of international financial interests, and pictured three people — Janet L. Yellen, the Federal Reserve chairwoman; Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs; and George Soros, the liberal investor — as emblematic of the forces aligned against Mr. Trump. All three of those people are Jewish.  In a statement, the Anti-Defamation League said the ad had — perhaps unintentionally — invoked “subjects that anti-Semites have used for ages.”  Jason D. Greenblatt, a lawyer for Mr. Trump, said any suggestion that the ad had been anti-Semitic was “completely false and uncalled-for.”
“There is a kind of do-over quality to it,” said Landon Y. Jones, the author of the 1980 book “Great Expectations: America and the Baby Boom Generation.” “This is their last chance to get it right.”  Photo  A shared history binds the boomers — as do, broadly speaking, some shared traits. Their parents suffered through the Depression and World War II before rearing them in the most prosperous society the world had ever seen. Inevitably, perhaps, they were guided by two polestars: responsibility and entitlement.  Those dueling impulses powered the rise of both Clintons: one impulse galvanizing supporters who deeply admired their commitment to public service, the other galling critics who saw them as playing by their own rules.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “There’s this tremendous idealism with the Clintons — actually living social change, embodying social change,” said Gil Troy, the author of “The Age of Clinton: America in the 1990s” and a history professor at McGill University in Montreal. “But also, at the end of day, not just having this will to power, but also being so convinced of their own self-righteousness that they improvise a new set of morality and ethics.”  Like her husband’s, Mrs. Clinton’s political odyssey began in earnest when she volunteered for George McGovern’s youth-powered 1972 presidential bid, one that ended in a lopsided, welcome-to-adulthood takedown of ’60s idealism at the hands of President Richard M. Nixon and his “silent majority.” It was there, in the trenches, that the Clintons — still in their mid-20s, and not yet married — began to assemble the network of trusted friends that continues to surround them.  Twenty years later, at 46, Bill Clinton became the third-youngest president ever elected. At 69, Hillary Clinton would be the second-oldest. In many respects, her journey has become her generation’s journey — from protester to parent and now grandparent, from earnest idealist to battle-hardened realist.  Photo  They would be bookends on their cohort, one seizing the national stage on behalf of their generation in its prime, the other, who now qualifies for Medicare, vying to lead it into its dotage.  Of course, the presidential election has featured not one but two members of the generation born between 1946 and 1964. And just as the Clintons grew out of the campus left, Donald J. Trump traces his political following, if not his own formation, to that generation’s Nixon voters: those who did not protest, or even attend college; who preferred Elvis to the Beatles, Sinatra to Santana, the familiar to the foreign, order to upheaval. (Though at this point, what was once the counterculture has become the culture: Mr. Trump has been known to play the Rolling Stones at events.)  If Mr. Trump does not fit the profile of the searching, liberal, conflicted boomer, well, blame the liberal boomers whose cultural contributions crystallized that image, most memorably in “The Big Chill.” (They also created its counter-counterculture foil: Think of Mr. Trump — thin-skinned, red-faced, schooled in uniform — as the R.O.T.C. commander Douglas C. Neidermeyer in “Animal House.”)  The most enduring boomer icons, however, sprang not from a Hollywood script but from Yale Law School and the Arkansas Statehouse. Standing under the balloons at Madison Square Garden in 1992 — with Fleetwood Mac’s “Don’t Stop” blaring — the Clintons sent a clear message to their peers: Yesterday’s gone. Our time is now.  And also, maybe, now.  Not much remains of the we-can-change-the-world optimism that swept in with the new administration in 1993, and maybe with good reason. The great accomplishments of Mr. Clinton’s presidency — peace and its anticipated dividends, a surging economy, shrinking budget deficits — were washed away. As some boomers sent their kids to college, others sent their sons and daughters off to fight in a seemingly permanent conflict halfway around the globe. If elected, Mrs. Clinton would inherit the Islamic State, an ever-widening income gap, partisan gridlock and a populace so polarized and full of loathing that it seems to be segregating. Her husband had it easy by comparison.  Photo  It’s no fun getting old.  Not that Mrs. Clinton is complaining. She has embraced her longevity, beginning a recent rally in Pueblo, Colo., with a callback to her last visit there. “I know there are a lot of really young people here,” she said, “but was anybody here back in 1992?”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Cheers shot up from some of the gathering’s elders.  People have been hurrying the Clintons’ generation off the stage for a while: Time magazine declared the “Twilight of the Boomers” in a headline in 2000. Even then, the nation was suffering from boomer fatigue. “Long-Awaited Baby Boomer Die-Off to Begin Soon, Experts Say,” The Onion teased, imagining “a glorious new world in which no one will ever again have to endure tales of Joan Baez’s performance at Woodstock.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In 2008, Barack Obama, though born at the tail end of the generation in 1961, consciously styled himself as younger, saying that Americans were tired of “the psychodrama of the baby boom generation,” that they hungered for “a different kind of politics.”  No doubt. And yet in many ways, the 2016 election has served as a rematch between two boomer factions: one candidate promising a 1950s-flavored throwback to an idealized postwar America at its most muscular, the other sounding the familiar liberal call to tear down whatever societal barriers still stand.  Mrs. Clinton is a long way from the 1969 commencement speaker who told her Wellesley classmates that the challenge for their generation was to “practice politics as the art of making what appears to be impossible, possible.” She is now more likely to warn of the perils of overpromising. “We don’t need any more of that,” she says.  Photo  But the battles of the ’60s are never far from Mrs. Clinton’s mind. Even a September speech to students at Temple University in Philadelphia featured a reference to her struggles during the Vietnam War.  In the fight for the soul of the boomers, Mrs. Clinton holds a slight upper hand: A recent New York Times/CBS News poll showed her with an edge over Mr. Trump, 48 percent to 42 percent, among likely voters in their generation. The difference was within the poll’s margin of error. As much as they were inspired by Mr. Clinton and exhilarated by Mr. Obama, her peers appear to be turning to her to supply the grown-up voice of reason a fractious country needs.  “I think at this point in history, it’s crucial that we have someone who understands the long view,” said the actress Jamie Lee Curtis, who was born in 1958 and has been campaigning for Mrs. Clinton. “I think we’re a nation in trouble.”  They remain a powerful voting bloc. Though millennials are now the most populous living generation, they lack the boomers’ electoral punch. According to the Pew Research Center, fewer than half of eligible millennial voters said they voted in 2012. Turnout among boomers was nearly 70 percent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  This is Mrs. Clinton’s demographic sweet spot. Her stump speeches are liberally salted with mentions of her grandchildren; her platform includes opposing efforts to cut Social Security benefits and raise the retirement age.  And a volunteer army of boomer celebrities, some of whom have known the Clintons since the 1990s, are working on her behalf, including the actress Mary Steenburgen and her husband, Ted Danson. Another is Rob Reiner, who played the lefty student Michael Stivic on “All in the Family” and says he feels that the bigotry sent up on that sitcom has flared back up with a vengeance. “We are living in ‘All in the Family’ right now,” Mr. Reiner said. “It’s a daily reality show that stars Donald Trump as Archie Bunker.”  If those old characters were still around, Archie would probably be blaming Michael for everything from free trade to illegal immigration to the country’s sky-high divorce rate. And Michael would be taking credit for gay marriage, a black president and Bob Dylan’s Nobel Prize.  For all the steep challenges that await, if Mrs. Clinton is elected, she will at least have the chance to pursue a new set of progressive causes. To address and amend aspects of her husband’s political legacy. And to reshape America’s image of a generation and the couple that has come to embody it.
But layered on top of that are specific concerns over support for Israel; the nuclear arms agreement with Iran, which is unpopular with Jewish conservatives; and unease over anti-Semitism that has surfaced among segments of Mr. Trump’s supporters.  “Trump has become their champion,” said Rabbi Mark Winer, the president of the Florida Democratic Party Caucus of American Jews. “To me, that’s disqualifying in itself.”  At an early-voting site on Friday in Delray Beach, where an almost hourlong line had formed on a sidewalk, Al Drelich showed up in his red “Make America Great Again” cap. He gave his spare hat to a Trump volunteer, and stayed around to talk up Mr. Trump and to debate the many Clinton supporters.  He bristled at the criticism he had heard about Trump supporters, saying they were wrongly maligned as racist. Plus, he seemed to be saying, Jews should know better than to blame anti-Semitism on Mr. Trump.  “That will be there forever. It will never change,” Mr. Drelich, a retired mortgage underwriter in his 80s, said. “We survived, and we will survive. But Trump is better for Israel than Hillary.”  Clinton supporters argued that her support for Israel was clear. Beyond that, they said, she is simply more qualified to be president.  “She’s a decent, educated, well-prepared human being, who respects people’s rights and who conducts herself like a lady,” said Ken Sommers, 73, a retired dentist from Long Island.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Benna Golub, 69, a retired special education teacher, conceded that she had to think hard before picking Mrs. Clinton over Mr. Sanders in the primary. But there was no wavering, she said, when she voted for Mrs. Clinton again in the general election: “She’s more stable, more experienced, more capable.”  Photo  Early-voting turnout in South Florida has been higher than it was in 2012, and Democrats are hoping that Jewish support can counterbalance the Republicans who have been flooding voting sites elsewhere in the state. More than six million Floridians had voted as of Sunday morning, according to state statistics, with Democrats holding a slight edge. (Whom these voters chose will not be known until Tuesday.)  The three large South Florida counties have more than 500,000 Jews, or roughly 7 percent of the population, a percentage higher than anywhere in the country outside the New York metropolitan area, according to a 2015 study by researchers working under the auspices of the Jewish Federations of North America.  For decades, Jews brought their politics with them from the Northeast as they filled up South Florida’s many condominiums and subdivisions for middle-class retirees. Mrs. Clinton is widely expected to carry a majority of the Jewish voters in Florida, just as President Obama and other Democratic nominees have done.  The Democrats had once counted on the assistance of so-called condo commandos, who imported the machine-style politics from back home and were considered very effective at drumming up support from their neighbors. Though their influence has faded, as many of those political organizers have died and the area has become more diverse, the contingent of Jewish voters has remained significant enough that both parties court them religiously.  Republicans have tried repeatedly to siphon Jewish voters, making appeals based on promises of lower taxes and being a stronger ally of Israel. Many here recall a crush of direct mail and television ads in 2012, as well as the billboards placed by the Republican Jewish Coalition along Interstate 95 lamenting, “Obama … Oy Vey!!”  Republican Jewish activists believe they have a good chance of helping Senator Marco Rubio win his race for re-election against Patrick Murphy, a Democratic congressman from South Florida. But Mr. Trump’s candidacy, which has been divisive even among Jewish Republicans, has tempered those ambitions for the presidential campaign.  “There was hope that the Iran arms deal would provide an avenue, but that’s frankly drowned out by the concern about Trump,” said Kenneth D. Wald, a political scientist at the University of Florida, who studies Jewish political behavior. “The level of alarm about Trump is very high.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  While Palm Beach County is one of the centers of Jewish life in the United States, it is also notorious in the history of American, and American Jewish, politics. Its confusing “butterfly” presidential ballot in 2000 helped lead to the defeat of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who would have been the country’s first Jewish vice president. Thousands of voters in the area mistakenly voted for Pat Buchanan, the ultraconservative candidate deeply disliked by many Jews. The Supreme Court ultimately ended a statewide recount of votes, giving the election to George W. Bush.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Lieberman later became an independent and a free agent of sorts, endorsing Senator John McCain, a Republican, over Mr. Obama in 2008 and speaking at that year’s Republican National Convention. That, Jewish Democratic leaders believe, made it all the more potent when he announced this summer that he was backing Mrs. Clinton, citing their years in the Senate together and saying she would be good for bipartisanship.  Whether Mr. Lieberman’s endorsement, and the numerous Facebook ads and robocalls touting it, has influenced anyone is not clear. It certainly has not moved Eddie Rosianu, 88, who said he had been a steadfast supporter of the Republican Party since he arrived in the United States from Romania by way of Israel.  “Eisenhower brought me here, and gave me a good future, a good family,” said Mr. Rosianu, a jewelry manufacturer whose business was on 47th Street in Manhattan for nearly 40 years.  His vote for Mr. Trump was based on more than party loyalty. “He has charisma,” he said. He also recalled a yearslong process to get him into the country, but now, echoing Mr. Trump, he said immigrants were entering more easily and with less scrutiny today. “We don’t know who they are,” he said.  And as it is November, Jeff Goldings, a 50-year-old freelance writer and editor who had come to the Palm Beach County Democratic Party’s office to volunteer with his mother, expressed a simple feeling many Floridians, Jewish or gentile, have been feeling of late.  He complained about the commercials on television and radio that “bombard you every day,” the constant phone calls and canvassers knocking on doors, trying to eke out every swing state voter they can.  “You can’t escape it — it’s everywhere, on every medium,” Mr. Goldings said. “I think people need a break.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, told Congress on Sunday that he had seen no evidence in a recently discovered trove of emails to change his conclusion that Hillary Clinton should face no charges over her handling of classified information.  Mr. Comey’s announcement, just two days before the election, was an effort to clear the cloud of suspicion he had publicly placed over her presidential campaign late last month when he alerted Congress that the F.B.I. would examine the emails.  “Based on our review, we have not changed our conclusions that we expressed in July with respect to Secretary Clinton,” Mr. Comey wrote in a letter to the leaders of several congressional committees. He said agents had reviewed all communications to and from Mrs. Clinton in the new trove from when she was secretary of state.  The letter was a dramatic final twist in a tumultuous nine days for both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Comey, who drew widespread criticism for announcing that the F.B.I. had discovered new emails that might be relevant to its investigation of Mrs. Clinton, which ended in July with no charges. That criticism of Mr. Comey from both parties is likely to persist after the election.  While the new letter was clear as it related to Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Comey’s message was otherwise vague. He did not say that agents had completed their review of the emails, or that they were abandoning the matter in regard to her aides. But federal law enforcement officials said that they considered the review of emails related to Mrs. Clinton’s server complete, and that Mr. Comey’s letter was intended to convey that.  One senior law enforcement official said that as recently as Friday, it was not clear whether the review would be completed by Election Day. But after days of working in shifts around the clock, teams of counterintelligence agents and technology specialists at the bureau’s headquarters in Washington finished their examination of the thousands of emails. Officials had decided to make their decision public as soon as they had reached it, to avoid any suggestion that they were suppressing information.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  According to the law enforcement official, many of the emails were personal messages or duplicates of ones that the bureau had previously examined during the original inquiry.  Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, said in a post on Twitter that the campaign had always believed she would be cleared of any wrongdoing.  “We were always confident nothing would cause the July decision to be revisited,” Mr. Fallon said. “Now Director Comey has confirmed it.”  Kellyanne Conway, Donald J. Trump’s campaign manager, lamented the fact that Mr. Comey had again inserted himself into the election, but she predicted that his conclusion would have no effect on the outcome.  “The investigation has been mishandled from the beginning,” Ms. Conway said on MSNBC, arguing that Mrs. Clinton had wasted taxpayer money and federal resources because of her email practices. “She was reckless, she was careless, she was selfish.”  The new review began after agents discovered a cache of emails in early October in an unrelated investigation into the disgraced former congressman Anthony D. Weiner, the estranged husband of one of Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides. When searching Mr. Weiner’s laptop for evidence of whether he had exchanged illicit messages with a teenage girl, they discovered emails belonging to the aide, Huma Abedin.  That announcement renewed talk of an investigation that had shadowed Mrs. Clinton for much of the Democratic primary campaign. She and her aides had been under investigation for improperly storing classified information on Mrs. Clinton’s private email server. The discovery of new emails raised the prospect that the laptop might have new information that would renew the F.B.I. inquiry.  Federal law enforcement officials had said for the past week that only something astounding would change their conclusion that nobody should be charged. But the mere potential for legal trouble was enough to make Republicans gleeful, and Mr. Trump highlighted the F.B.I.’s actions in campaign ads.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the end of a rocky week for Mrs. Clinton that included wild, false speculation about looming indictments and shocking discoveries in the emails, Mr. Comey’s letter swept away her largest and most immediate problem.  Republicans immediately accused Mr. Comey of making his announcement prematurely. “Comey must be under enormous political pressure to cave like this and announce something he can’t possibly know,” Newt Gingrich, a Trump adviser, wrote on Twitter.  Mr. Comey’s move is also sure to prompt questions from Democrats. Most important among them: Why did Mr. Comey raise the specter of wrongdoing before agents had even read the emails, especially since it took only days to determine that they were not significant?  Just hours before Mr. Comey sent the letter to Capitol Hill, Senate Democrats said hearings should be held to examine how Mr. Comey had handled the matter. After the letter’s release, Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the Justice Department “needs to take a look at its procedures to prevent similar actions that could influence future elections.”  “There’s no doubt that it created a false impression about the nature of the agency’s inquiry,” she added.  The F.B.I. director’s vague, brief announcement on Oct. 28 left Mrs. Clinton with few details to rebut and little time to do it. Many current and former F.B.I. agents and Justice Department officials said Mr. Comey had needlessly plunged the F.B.I. into the politics of a presidential election, with no clear way out.  A long list of former Justice Department officials, including Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., chided Mr. Comey. Despite the fact that the bureau did not find anything that changed its original conclusion about Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Comey has insisted that he had no choice but to inform Congress about the new emails because the investigation had been completed and he had pledged transparency, according to senior F.B.I. officials.  Because of Mr. Comey’s Oct. 28 letter, Attorney General Loretta Lynch made completing a review of the emails a top priority. Late last month, Mr. Comey ordered agents to work around the clock to sift through the messages. That process, senior F.B.I. officials said, was painstaking, because each message that had been sent to Mrs. Clinton had to be reviewed to determine whether it had sensitive national security materials.  In Mr. Comey’s short letter to Congress on Sunday, he said he was “very grateful to the professionals at the F.B.I. for doing an extraordinary amount of high-quality work in a short period of time.”
WASHINGTON — A Marine veteran detained in Yemen for more than a year was released Sunday after diplomatic negotiations, the State Department announced.  The detainee, Wallead Yusuf Pitts Luqman, 37, was abducted in April 2015 as he tried to leave the country after having taught English there for two years. He was then held in secret by the Houthis, a Shiite rebel group.  Secretary of State John Kerry, who was involved in the negotiations to free Mr. Luqman and was in touch with his family, announced the news of his release in a statement.  Mr. Kerry also thanked the government of Oman for its assistance and said, “We also recognize this positive gesture by the Houthis.”  A senior American official said the Houthis had cleared Mr. Luqman of wrongdoing in August before finally acknowledging that they were holding him, a key step in getting him home. He was flown to Oman after negotiations.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Last month, Mr. Luqman’s wife, Jihan Mohamed, went public with her husband’s abduction, hoping the move would help free him. She said members of the Houthi political security organization, one of Yemen’s two security agencies, had been holding her husband.  “They had no reason to take him, and there are no charges,” Ms. Mohamed said in a Facebook posting. “After months of not knowing his condition or where he was, I finally received proof of life this year.”  She pleaded with the Houthis to release her husband. “He is a good family man, good Muslim, and he should be returned to his wife and children,” she said.  Mr. Luqman, an American citizen, served in the Marines and the Army, according to his LinkedIn profile. He had previously lived in Minnesota, Georgia and the Milwaukee area.  Officials with the interagency Hostage Recovery Fusion Cell and the State Department worked to free Mr. Luqman, whose condition was not immediately known.  After the American-backed government in Yemen fell last year, the Houthis seized power in parts of the country and detained several Americans.  Oman was instrumental in the release of at least four Americans. Another died last year while in the custody of the Houthis. An autopsy showed that he had been tortured.
It is unclear how much legitimacy these organizations can realistically expect to gain, given the extreme nature of their views to most Americans. But if they are able to maintain even a measure of influence on the right after the election, this could be Mr. Trump’s most enduring legacy.  Photo  “Trump has shown that our message is healthy, normal and organic — and millions of Americans agree with us,” said Matthew M. Heimbach, a co-founder of the Traditionalist Youth Network, a white nationalist group that claims to support the interests of working-class whites. It also advocates the separation of the races.  Whatever happens on Nov. 8, Mr. Trump’s candidacy has brought groups like Mr. Heimbach’s out of the shadows, and they say they have no intention of returning.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “For racists in this country, this campaign has been a complete affirmation of their fears, worries, dreams and hopes,” said Ryan Lenz, the editor of the Hatewatch blog at the Southern Poverty Law Center, which tracks such groups from its headquarters in Montgomery, Ala. “Most things they believe have been legitimized, or have been given the stamp of approval, by mainstream American politics to the point now where it’s no longer shameful to be a racist.”  The biggest beneficiary may well be the so-called alt-right, the once obscure and now ascendant white nationalist movement with close ties to Breitbart News, the website operated by Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, Stephen K. Bannon.  “If Trump loses, I am going to be a little bit sad, but I’m certainly not going to feel like all is lost, because he sling-shotted us a long way,” said Richard Spencer, who is credited with coining the term alt-right in 2008. “We can just look at 2015 and 2016 as the beginning of a new stage.”  Some on the far right say they believe the election of Hillary Clinton could prove to be its own sort of boon, further embittering and maybe even radicalizing some disappointed Trump supporters.  “There will be people who will say, ‘There’s nothing we can do to change this system from within,’ and they are going to look to perhaps alternative options,” said Nathan Damigo, the founder of Identity Europa, a California group dedicated to fighting what it calls the “dispossession” of white Americans.  Mr. Damigo envisions building a protest movement along the lines of Black Lives Matter — only to promote the interests of whites. Others on the far right talk about working from inside the political system, lobbying Congress or getting behind Republican candidates who espouse similar views. Some even draw parallels to the post-2008 period, when roiling anger at Barack Obama’s election gave birth to the Tea Party, which ended the political careers of Republican moderates from Washington to state capitals.  In short, they say they believe that Mr. Trump’s campaign has turned them into a force that the Republican establishment cannot ignore.  “What you can’t say is that we’re just a bunch of marginal loons,” Mr. Spencer said. “The truth is that we have a deeper connection with the Trumpian forces and Trumpian populism than the mainstream conservatives do. They’re going to have to deal with us.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Spencer predicted that the conservative movement’s broader embrace of the far right could start with news media outlets adding what he described as “alt-lite” hosts. These would be people who did not consider themselves members of the movement, but shared the conviction that policies on immigration were threatening the country’s identity and well-being.  To members of the alt-right, Mr. Trump is a transformative figure. It has been a long time since a mainstream politician, let alone a presidential nominee, talked about the mass deportation of undocumented immigrants and warned about “international banks” plotting “the destruction of U.S. sovereignty.” Mr. Trump has given them the legitimacy they long craved.  “Trump reaffirms what we say,” Mr. Heimbach said. “He has brought to the forefront the policies of nationalism and secure borders.”  While he made headlines in the spring for shoving a young black woman at a Trump rally in Louisville, Ky., Mr. Heimbach said he had not formally endorsed Mr. Trump because “he is not a white nationalist.” But Mr. Heimbach added that he and other white nationalists were grateful to Mr. Trump for championing ideas they support.  Photo  For his part, Mr. Trump has not expressed support for the white nationalist groups that have rallied to his candidacy. But neither has he distanced himself from them, with the exception of David Duke, the former Klansman who is running for Senate and whom Mr. Trump disavowed after some initial wavering last winter.  They are now beginning to grapple with how to best harness the energy that his campaign has stirred up. Mr. Spencer’s group, the National Policy Institute, which says it is “dedicated to the heritage, identity and future of people of European descent in the United States, and around the world,” is organizing a valedictory conference in the Ronald Reagan Building in Washington shortly after the election.  The aim is to take stock of the presidential campaign — “when our ideas began invading the mainstream” — and figure out what’s next. In addition to Mr. Spencer, the speakers will include Peter Brimelow, the founder of Vdare.com, an anti-immigration website named for Virginia Dare, the first white baby born in the English colonies.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Many of these groups say they have seen a significant surge in interest in the last year. Jared Taylor, a prominent white nationalist, said traffic to his website, American Renaissance, was up 30 percent since the beginning of the Trump campaign.  Mark Pitcavage, a senior researcher at the Anti-Defamation League, suggested that these extremist groups might be trying to rationalize the growing certainty of a Trump loss for their supporters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “They need an optimistic message for their followers, lest there be demoralization and dropouts,” he said. “They are less likely to be willing to talk about how a Trump defeat might hurt their cause.”  It is possible that without the organizing force and urgency of his candidacy, these groups will lose much of the momentum that they have gathered over the last 18 months. Other politicians may try to replicate his success, but Mr. Trump is in many ways a unique figure, between his name recognition and his embrace of provocative and even offensive language and ideas as a campaign strategy.  Whether they are able to build on the success of the Trump campaign will depend in part on what Mr. Trump decides to do after the election. It is unclear whether his America First platform was largely a product of political opportunism, or if he is truly committed to the nativist cause. It is equally unclear whether he will try to remain an active political force, most likely through his own media organization, after the election.  Photo  In the meantime, Mr. Trump’s candidacy has served as a call to arms for extremist leaders who usually have little use for electoral politics.  Mr. Taylor, who has not supported a presidential candidate since Pat Buchanan sought the Republican nomination in 2000, recorded robocalls for Mr. Trump during the Republican primary. And Andrew Anglin, the founder of the neo-Nazi website The Daily Stormer, endorsed Mr. Trump days after he issued his first promise to build a wall to keep out Mexican criminals and “rapists” in June 2015.  “I basically agree with everything Donald Trump advocates,” Mr. Anglin wrote in an email. He went on to say Mr. Trump has made it “socially acceptable” to talk about thing that were once off limits, such as “the globalist Jewish agenda.”  Even in the age of Trump, not everything is socially acceptable. The Daily Stormer recently featured a post urging its readers to make one final push for Mr. Trump via their social media feeds.  “ONLY NORMIE FRIENDLY STUFF,” it specified. “NO Nazi stuff, just intense anti-Hillary stuff.”
Email, a main conduit of communication for two decades, now appears so vulnerable that the nation seems to be wondering whether its bursting inboxes can ever be safe. Election systems, the underpinning of democracy, seem to be at such risk that it is unimaginable that the United States will go into another national election without treating them as “critical infrastructure.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But President Obama has been oddly quiet on these issues. He delivered a private warning to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia during their final face-to-face encounter two months ago, aides say. Still, Mr. Obama has barely spoken publicly about the implications of foreign meddling in the election. His instincts, those who have worked with him on cyberissues say, are to deal with the problem by developing new norms of international behavior or authorizing covert action rather than direct confrontation.  After a series of debates in the Situation Room, Mr. Obama and his aides concluded that any public retaliation should be postponed until after the election — to avoid the appearance that politics influenced his decision and to avoid provoking Russian counterstrikes while voting is underway. It remains unclear whether Mr. Obama will act after Tuesday, as his aides hint, or leave the decision about a “proportional response” to his successor.  Cybersleuths, historians and strategists will debate for years whether Russia’s actions reflected a grand campaign of interference or mere opportunism on the part of Mr. Putin. While the administration has warned for years about the possibility of catastrophic attacks, what has happened in the past six months has been far more subtle.  Russia has used the techniques — what they call “hybrid war,” mixing new technologies with old-fashioned propaganda, misinformation and disruption — for years in former Soviet states and elsewhere in Europe. The only surprise was that Mr. Putin, as he intensified confrontations with Washington as part of a nationalist campaign to solidify his own power amid a deteriorating economy, was willing to take them to American shores.  The most common theory is that while the Russian leader would prefer the election of Donald J. Trump — in part because Mr. Trump has suggested that NATO is irrelevant and that the United States should pull its troops back to American shores — his primary motive is to undercut what he views as a smug American sense of superiority about its democratic processes.  Madeleine K. Albright, a former secretary of state who is vigorously supporting Hillary Clinton, wrote recently that Mr. Putin’s goal was “to create doubt about the validity of the U.S. election results, and to make us seem hypocritical when we question the conduct of elections in other countries.”  If so, this is a very different use of power than what the Obama administration has long prepared the nation for.  Four years ago, Leon E. Panetta, the defense secretary at the time, warned of an impending “cyber Pearl Harbor” in which enemies could “contaminate the water supply in major cities or shut down the power grid across large parts of the country,” perhaps in conjunction with a conventional attack.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That is still a risk, of course — one that the Pentagon and its United States Cyber Command spend billions of dollars trying to deter. Yet America’s main adversaries know those steps would constitute an act of war, most likely prompting an overwhelming military response.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  What has come instead — doling out stolen emails, testing the defenses of the voting system — clearly caught the administration off guard.  “The unprecedented use of cyberintrusions to influence this election should galvanize our country to act,” said John P. Carlin, who left the Justice Department two weeks ago as assistant attorney general for national security, a post in which he helped oversee legal responses to major Chinese and Iranian attacks on American banks and other institutions. “Whoever is elected, how to regulate, defend and deter in cyberspace must be at the top of the national security agenda.”  Yet he noted that “in a campaign where cyberintrusions and threats dominated the news more than any other in American history, there has been surprisingly little discussion on how our country should confront the problem going forward.”  The severity of the challenge has been particularly evident even in the final days of the campaign.  The Department of Homeland Security invited reporters on Friday to tour its war room, a vast monitoring center that is buried deep in a nondescript building in Virginia and is connected to the National Security Agency and sensors running through government networks. The center is supposed to be the internet equivalent of the giant North American Aerospace Defense Command in Cheyenne Mountain, just outside Colorado Springs, which opened almost exactly 50 years ago to scan the skies and warn of incoming Soviet nuclear missiles.  The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center is expected to do the same thing, but its vision is limited to federal computer systems. Officials conceded that if a foreign power began tinkering with the registration rolls or vote-tallying systems on Tuesday — a process run by the states — it was unlikely that direct evidence would show up on the center’s screens.  “Our partners would have to call us,” one senior official conceded.  Here on Sunday night in the battleground state of New Hampshire, Mrs. Clinton held one of the final rallies of her campaign just miles from the headquarters of a company that was taken out two weeks ago in a “denial of service” attack that paralyzed websites along the East Coast.  Officials at the company, Dyn DNS, and others like it are frantically looking for ways to ward off another attack on Election Day out of fear that it could freeze up websites used for getting out the vote, showing people how to get to polling places or reporting results.  And just a few hours before she arrived here, Mrs. Clinton got news that the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, had informed Congress that his agency’s review of the latest batch of her emails, found on the computer of former Representative Anthony D. Weiner of New York, the estranged husband of one of Mrs. Clinton’s top aides, did nothing to change his view of the case.  Mrs. Clinton’s decision to use a private email server, of course, was the original digital act of this election season — the decision by Mrs. Clinton that, to keep her personal emails private, she would conduct her government business from a private server.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Comey has never conclusively determined whether the Russians, or any other foreign power, broke into that server, which was kept in the Clintons’ home in Chappaqua, N.Y. But the Russians had been behind many other break-ins, his investigators noted, including of the unclassified systems of the State Department, the White House and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. If they skipped Mrs. Clinton’s server, one investigator noted, it must have been an oversight.
“I don’t trust Hillary,” said Ms. Gordon, 57, who added that she resented illegal immigrants because she went through a long and expensive naturalization process. Her husband, John, 62, an engineer, added that “there’ll be more jobs” with Mr. Trump in charge.  Photo  Since January, Mr. Clinton has done nearly 500 public events, a good deal of them designed to capture the affection white working-class voters had for him and then transfer it to Mrs. Clinton. But that happens to be the demographic that constitutes Mr. Trump’s base. Indeed, the man who was arguably the greatest political mind of his era has become something of a peripheral player, even within his wife’s campaign. He has spent much of his time seeking support on the Democratic margins among those white voters he refuses to believe have abandoned him — and his wife — for good. “They took a leave of absence from normal politics because, you know, they went a long time without a raise,” Mr. Clinton explained in a brief, post-selfie interview with a reporter in the hotel lobby. “So that’s cyclical.”  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign managers and pollsters, aided by sophisticated data models and experience in the elections of 2008 and 2012, have shifted their focus away from the “Bubba” voters and to the winning Obama coalition of African-Americans, young progressives and Hispanics who are powering Mrs. Clinton. And while members of his campaign say they cannot imagine a more valuable political spouse to have, in interviews as well as hacked emails released by WikiLeaks, Mr. Clinton has sometimes come off as an old master struggling to get with the new program.  According to two advisers to the Clintons, who declined to be identified because they were describing internal conversations, Mr. Clinton has at times doubted the trust-the-data approach of her campaign manager, Robby Mook, and has required mollifying assurances from senior staff members. Sometimes lower-rung staff members, or one of his numerous Democratic allies in the country, have gone to Mr. Clinton to complain about decisions being made by Mrs. Clinton’s top campaign officials, causing irritation all around.  One of the Clinton advisers said Mr. Clinton feared that her primary opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, would commit voter fraud in the Iowa caucuses by busing college students into the state, and urged the campaign to divert valuable energy away from organizing and onto defense against dirty tricks.  Mr. Clinton saw his wife’s coming blowout loss in New Hampshire, where his unexpectedly strong showing in 1992 helped propel him to the nomination, as a crisis that desperately needed to be staved off, despite polling that showed Mrs. Clinton would quickly rebound as the race moved to more diverse states.  “He still thinks that HRC/he should be spending more time in Iowa/NH — earlier in January,” his chief of staff emailed Mr. Mook last December.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Clinton’s travel schedule, while robust, has operated on a second tier, with Clinton surrogates such as President Obama and his wife, Michelle, Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts appearing in the most prime locations. At times, the campaign even seems to prefer him off the radar.  Photo  Before Mrs. Clinton’s debate with Mr. Sanders in October 2015 in Nevada, Jake Sullivan, Mrs. Clinton’s top policy aide, responded to an email from Huma Abedin, her top personal aide, confirming that Mr. Clinton would be joining his wife on the plane to Las Vegas with the words, “This is not a positive development.”  Asked about Mr. Clinton’s role and standing in the campaign, his aides said his trips to Massachusetts and Missouri, both of which Mrs. Clinton narrowly won in the primaries, were based on his feedback and that the campaign’s data showed Mr. Clinton was decisive in delivering victory. And Mr. Mook said Mr. Clinton has been nothing but helpful.  “He’s been an integral part of this campaign throughout,” said Mr. Mook in a statement. “Once or twice a day I’m able to get his feedback and advice, and I could not be more grateful to have someone who is at once a mentor, a political junkie and a brilliant tactician for our campaign.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Clinton acknowledged that he was glad the campaign was finally drawing to a close but added, “I’m having a good time, as you can see.”  But it has not always seemed like much fun. One of Mr. Clinton’s closest allies said he had been demoralized by an election that had resuscitated talk of his sexual affairs, alleged and otherwise.  He has generally stuck to the script but sometimes unintentionally causes trouble, as when he met with Loretta Lynch, the attorney general, on a tarmac in Phoenix, an encounter Mr. Trump has used to accuse Ms. Lynch of rigging the State Department email investigation for Mrs. Clinton. In a January email, Mr. Clinton’s press secretary, Angel Ureña, let Mrs. Clinton’s staff know that one trip by Mr. Clinton to New Hampshire had resulted in no such drama: “Fair to say we didn’t break anything.”  And on the trail, his age can show, with drifting sentences coming out of a dried mouth.  At a rally at the New Belgium brewery in Fort Collins, Colo., where a propeller plane with the words “Go Trump” painted under its wings buzzed overhead, Mr. Clinton relayed how he had told hurting coal miners who disliked his wife, “You guys did well when I was president, let’s come in and talk.”  Photo  But his few applause lines came when he mentioned the Black Lives Matter movement and Mr. Sanders, and when he doled out progressive red meat about free college.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a Denver nightclub, Mr. Clinton made his case under a giant disco ball. Brooke McReynolds, 24, said she was impressed, but found his attention to the white working classes “a dying mind-set.” Still, she said, “He’s getting there.”  And yet when Mr. Clinton returns to form, he remains something to behold.  At his Pueblo rally, Mr. Clinton had the crowd uh-huhing as he lamented Mr. Trump’s degradation of politics. (“It looks more like reality TV and doesn’t do anything to change reality.”) He got them laughing when he told men who feared a female president to get over it because when women work on weekends, “We’ll have more time to watch football.” And a hush fell over the crowd when Mr. Clinton slipped inside the mind of the white voters who had left his family to support Mr. Trump.  “Look, his base is where I grew up. I was born in Arkansas to a mother of Scots-Irish lineage,” Mr. Clinton said. These were good, trustworthy people, he said, “but always and forever we have been manipulated by scoundrels.”  Mr. Trump, he said, followed in a long line of exploiters who “just — rub — salt — in our wounds.”  A white middle-aged man standing beside his young son in the back shouted the refrain often heard at Mr. Trump’s rallies: “Lock that bitch up.”  Mr. Clinton continued as if he had not heard a thing.
She concluded with an appeal to those who have waited decades for a female president.  “Let’s make history together,” she said.  Photo  In Manchester, N.H., Mr. Trump took the stage with his family at Southern New Hampshire University Arena as “God Bless the U.S.A.” blared, blue laser beams illuminated the dark hall and a smoke machine piped a haze over the crowd.  Mr. Trump asked a country polarized over his personality and tactics to embrace his plan to thoroughly shake up Washington.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I am asking for the votes of all Americans, Democrats, Republicans, independents,” Mr. Trump said, “who are so desperately in need of change.”  The contrasts between the candidates and their messages were on vivid display in the campaign’s last full day.  As she embarked on a four-state tour, Mrs. Clinton gave a sunny and optimistic summation of her candidacy for the White House.  “Tomorrow, you can vote for a hopeful, inclusive, big-hearted America,” she told a crowd in Pittsburgh.  Photo  Mr. Trump, who campaigned in five states on Monday, took a harsher approach, assailing the “crooked media,” attacking a “corrupt Washington establishment” and mocking Mrs. Clinton over and over.  “It’s a rigged, rigged system,” he declared in Raleigh, N.C. “And now it’s up to the American people to deliver the justice that we deserve at the ballot box tomorrow.”  As the campaign wound down, both candidates dispensed with ritual. Mrs. Clinton, who relishes upbraiding her opponent, toned down her usual assault on Mr. Trump’s conduct and temperament. And Mr. Trump, who normally seeks to convey confidence at all times, sounded uncharacteristically vulnerable.  “They say we’ll get a tremendous amount of credit, win or lose,” he said during a rally in Sarasota, Fla. “I said: ‘No, no, no, no. I don’t want any credit if we lose.’”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Despite the ugliness of the campaign, there were signs that Americans were seizing the opportunity to express themselves at the ballot box in large numbers. Turnout in states that allow early voting was high, and in interviews, many voters said they were eager to bring an end to this unusual, exhausting and still suspenseful election.  “I’m totally ready for this election to be over,” said Mary Hoch, 54, who attended Mr. Trump’s rally in Sarasota with a “Make America Great Again” hat on her head and a “Deplorable Lives Matter” pin on her shirt.  Photo  Ms. Hoch predicted a Trump victory. “I think there are a lot of silent Trump voters,” she said.  Daniel Saunders, 58, who attended a rally for Mrs. Clinton in Charlotte, N.C., was just as exasperated by the race. “I’m embarrassed by it,” he said.  But Mr. Saunders said he believed that Mrs. Clinton would eke out a win. “These things always tighten up, but I think she’ll pull it out,” he said.  Both Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton sent their running mates, families and allies across the country to maximize their reach in crucial swing states. Mr. Trump relied on his three oldest children — Ivanka, Eric and Donald Jr. — along with Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, and Sarah Palin, the former governor of Alaska and 2008 Republican vice-presidential nominee.  Mrs. Clinton deployed President Obama and former President Bill Clinton, as well as Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and the first lady, Michelle Obama, perhaps the most popular political figure in the country.  “Tomorrow, with your vote, you can say that this country has always been great,” Mrs. Obama said. “That it is the greatest country on earth.”  Mrs. Clinton’s running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, spent much of the day campaigning in North Carolina, which Mr. Obama carried in 2008 but lost four years later to Mitt Romney.  “It’s great to see a finish line, isn’t it?” Mr. Kaine said at an outdoor rally in Charlotte.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He expressed confidence in the ticket’s chances on Tuesday, but warned supporters against complacency and implored voters to embrace the chance to elect the nation’s first female president.  “Every election is important, but not every election will change history,” he said. “If we do what we know how to do, this election will change history.”  Mr. Trump’s running mate, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, started the day with a brisk jog across a windswept tarmac in an unlikely spot for a Republican: Duluth, Minn.  It was the Republican ticket’s second stop in deep-blue Minnesota in two days, and although few signs point to a Republican upset there, a modest crowd near Mr. Pence’s plane lapped up his attacks on Mrs. Clinton.  “It’s almost hard to keep up, all the headlines, all the scandals flowing out of just her years as secretary of state,” Mr. Pence said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Both campaigns conspicuously reached across party lines in their final pitches. In Scranton, Pa., Mr. Trump spoke to what he said were “Democratic voters in this country who are thirsting for change.” In Ann Arbor, Mich., Mrs. Clinton reminded an audience of her days as an intern for President Gerald R. Ford, a Republican from Michigan, and of all the Republican leaders who have endorsed her this year.  “We must put country ahead of party when it comes to this election,” she said.  Mr. Trump seemed sensitive to the fact that his final 48 hours on the campaign trail lacked the star power drawn to Mrs. Clinton, who was accompanied by musicians like Jay Z, Beyoncé, Lady Gaga and Mr. Springsteen. (Collectively, her surrogates have more than 80 Grammy Awards.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Beyoncé and Jay Z,” Mr. Trump said dismissively. “I like them.” But, he added mischievously, “I get bigger crowds than they do.”  But the hypercompetitive Mr. Trump could not resist trying to outshine his rival. In Manchester, he read aloud a letter that he said was from Bill Belichick, the coach of the New England Patriots football team.  “Congratulations on a tremendous campaign,” it purportedly read. “You have dealt with an unbelievable slanted and negative media and have come out beautifully.” (A spokesman for the Patriots said he could not confirm or deny the letter’s authenticity Monday night.)  As a final flourish, Mr. Trump claimed that Tom Brady, the team’s quarterback and a hero across New England, had cast a vote for him.  In a radio interview on Monday, however, Mr. Brady said he had not yet voted.
But his core mission was to implore voters across the country to rally behind Mrs. Clinton on Tuesday, or see the values and ideals that fueled his rise and powered his agenda defeated. So Mr. Obama stumped on Monday with the fervor of a man battling to preserve his legacy and with the joy of one who has watched his approval ratings tick higher as the presidential race’s tenor has sunk ever lower, savoring the almost palpable sense at Mrs. Clinton’s rallies that Americans will miss him when he is gone.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Whatever credibility I’ve earned after eight years as president,” Mr. Obama said, “I am asking you to trust me on this one.”  “I already voted,” he added. “I voted for Hillary Clinton, because I am absolutely confident that when she is president, this country will be in good hands — and I’m asking you to do the same.”  “I love you!” supporters kept shouting at the president as he turned serious to lay out the stakes of an extraordinary race.  “I love you back — I do,” Mr. Obama said in Michigan. “But tomorrow, you will choose whether we continue this journey of progress, or whether it all goes out the window.”  Nostalgia aside, there was no mistaking the seriousness of his message. Mr. Trump could never be trusted with control over the nation’s nuclear arsenal, the president said, if his own staff regarded him as too temperamental to use restraint on social media.  “Over the weekend, his campaign took away his Twitter account,” Mr. Obama said, referring to a report in The New York Times about the closing days of Mr. Trump’s campaign. “Now, if your closest advisers don’t trust you to tweet, then how can we trust him with the nuclear codes?”  “Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be commander in chief,” Mr. Obama said. “He’s unqualified to be America’s chief executive.”  Mr. Obama began his day at the White House, striding out of the residence to board Marine One just after 9:30 a.m. to begin his final campaign sprint. He rarely paused in the hours that followed, jetting from state to state on Air Force One, speeding from airport to rally site and back again in his armored limousine, racing against the clock on a historic presidential contest and his own campaign denouement.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In New Hampshire, his motorcade rushed at sunset down roads flanked by flaming-red and burnt-orange foliage to deliver him to a rally that drew more than 7,600. At the airport in Portsmouth, he confessed to a young boy who asked about the presidential jumbo jet that he was reluctant to relinquish Air Force One.  “I am going to miss this plane,” he told the boy with a smile. “I only have it for a few more months.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  His itinerary on Monday took the president to three states that he won in 2008 and 2012, and that are now crucial bulwarks for Mrs. Clinton. All three are also places where it is more difficult for Democrats to turn out their core supporters because they do not offer early voting.  “It’s not that often you get the chance to move history in a better direction,” Mr. Obama said. “This is one of those moments. Don’t let it slip away.”  In Michigan, he allowed himself a few moments to gloat, reminding voters of all that his administration had done to pull American automobile makers from the brink of bankruptcy.  “I think I’ve earned some credibility here,” Mr. Obama said tartly, repeating the phrase three times as he checked off the metrics of a resurgent automobile industry and recovering manufacturing sector.  He returned to his trademark campaign-trail catchphrases. As he elicited jeers by reciting a litany of criticisms of Mr. Trump — his not paying taxes, his comments about immigrants, women and Muslims — Mr. Obama barked, “Don’t boo. Vote!” He sparked chants of “Yes we can!” and “O-BAM-A.”  In Durham, N.H., he returned to the now-familiar story about how his 2008 campaign found its signature “Fired up! Ready to go!” theme, borrowed from a woman in a small town in South Carolina, whom he met after getting soaked in a driving rain to attend a gathering of only about 20 people.  “Every meeting she goes to, she does this thing” of chanting the refrain, Mr. Obama said. “Which is kind of strange. But the thing is that after a while, I get kind of fired up,” Mr. Obama said. “I’m starting to feel like I’m ready to go.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  When he retired to his cabin on Air Force One, Mr. Obama sat with senior adviser Valerie B. Jarrett, a confidante whose friendship with Mr. Obama dates to his Chicago days, and Susan E. Rice, his national security adviser. Brian Deese, his senior adviser for climate change, came too, along with Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary who has been with him throughout his presidency, and David Simas, his political director.  But it was in the thronging crowd that Mr. Obama seemed to relive his campaign experience most poignantly.  In Ann Arbor, he lingered for several minutes after he finished speaking, clasping hands with supporters and grinning at them broadly, as the strains of Mr. Springsteen’s “Land of Hope and Dreams” pulsed the stadium, a throwback to four years ago.  Then he turned on his heel to go, and a sudden cheer went up as people throughout the emptying stadium raised their arms and gave the president one final wave goodbye.
But his core mission was to implore voters across the country to rally behind Mrs. Clinton on Tuesday, or see the values and ideals that fueled his rise and powered his agenda defeated. So Mr. Obama stumped on Monday with the fervor of a man battling to preserve his legacy and with the joy of one who has watched his approval ratings tick higher as the presidential race’s tenor has sunk ever lower, savoring the almost palpable sense at Mrs. Clinton’s rallies that Americans will miss him when he is gone.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Whatever credibility I’ve earned after eight years as president,” Mr. Obama said, “I am asking you to trust me on this one.”  “I already voted,” he added. “I voted for Hillary Clinton, because I am absolutely confident that when she is president, this country will be in good hands — and I’m asking you to do the same.”  “I love you!” supporters kept shouting at the president as he turned serious to lay out the stakes of an extraordinary race.  “I love you back — I do,” Mr. Obama said in Michigan. “But tomorrow, you will choose whether we continue this journey of progress, or whether it all goes out the window.”  Nostalgia aside, there was no mistaking the seriousness of his message. Mr. Trump could never be trusted with control over the nation’s nuclear arsenal, the president said, if his own staff regarded him as too temperamental to use restraint on social media.  “Over the weekend, his campaign took away his Twitter account,” Mr. Obama said, referring to a report in The New York Times about the closing days of Mr. Trump’s campaign. “Now, if your closest advisers don’t trust you to tweet, then how can we trust him with the nuclear codes?”  “Donald Trump is temperamentally unfit to be commander in chief,” Mr. Obama said. “He’s unqualified to be America’s chief executive.”  Mr. Obama began his day at the White House, striding out of the residence to board Marine One just after 9:30 a.m. to begin his final campaign sprint. He rarely paused in the hours that followed, jetting from state to state on Air Force One, speeding from airport to rally site and back again in his armored limousine, racing against the clock on a historic presidential contest and his own campaign denouement.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In New Hampshire, his motorcade rushed at sunset down roads flanked by flaming-red and burnt-orange foliage to deliver him to a rally that drew more than 7,600. At the airport in Portsmouth, he confessed to a young boy who asked about the presidential jumbo jet that he was reluctant to relinquish Air Force One.  “I am going to miss this plane,” he told the boy with a smile. “I only have it for a few more months.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  His itinerary on Monday took the president to three states that he won in 2008 and 2012, and that are now crucial bulwarks for Mrs. Clinton. All three are also places where it is more difficult for Democrats to turn out their core supporters because they do not offer early voting.  “It’s not that often you get the chance to move history in a better direction,” Mr. Obama said. “This is one of those moments. Don’t let it slip away.”  In Michigan, he allowed himself a few moments to gloat, reminding voters of all that his administration had done to pull American automobile makers from the brink of bankruptcy.  “I think I’ve earned some credibility here,” Mr. Obama said tartly, repeating the phrase three times as he checked off the metrics of a resurgent automobile industry and recovering manufacturing sector.  He returned to his trademark campaign-trail catchphrases. As he elicited jeers by reciting a litany of criticisms of Mr. Trump — his not paying taxes, his comments about immigrants, women and Muslims — Mr. Obama barked, “Don’t boo. Vote!” He sparked chants of “Yes we can!” and “O-BAM-A.”  In Durham, N.H., he returned to the now-familiar story about how his 2008 campaign found its signature “Fired up! Ready to go!” theme, borrowed from a woman in a small town in South Carolina, whom he met after getting soaked in a driving rain to attend a gathering of only about 20 people.  “Every meeting she goes to, she does this thing” of chanting the refrain, Mr. Obama said. “Which is kind of strange. But the thing is that after a while, I get kind of fired up,” Mr. Obama said. “I’m starting to feel like I’m ready to go.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  When he retired to his cabin on Air Force One, Mr. Obama sat with senior adviser Valerie B. Jarrett, a confidante whose friendship with Mr. Obama dates to his Chicago days, and Susan E. Rice, his national security adviser. Brian Deese, his senior adviser for climate change, came too, along with Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary who has been with him throughout his presidency, and David Simas, his political director.  But it was in the thronging crowd that Mr. Obama seemed to relive his campaign experience most poignantly.  In Ann Arbor, he lingered for several minutes after he finished speaking, clasping hands with supporters and grinning at them broadly, as the strains of Mr. Springsteen’s “Land of Hope and Dreams” pulsed the stadium, a throwback to four years ago.  Then he turned on his heel to go, and a sudden cheer went up as people throughout the emptying stadium raised their arms and gave the president one final wave goodbye.
Wide-scale economic unease festers at a time, the statistics show, of relative economic stability — eight years after even an escalating financial crisis seemed, to some, a mere blip on the path to “Yes, we can.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And a campaign pocked with racism and sexism, rendered in open view, may well reach this conclusion: Americans replacing their first black chief executive with their first female one.  If 2008 was an emblem of progress on at least one measure, 2016 has required the grim acceptance of the limits, the disappointments, the blind spots — a nation taking a long look inward, and shuddering.  “I didn’t think about those other million people out there,” Edith S. Childs, the South Carolina councilwoman whose mantra “Fired up, ready to go!” was adopted by Mr. Obama as a campaign rallying cry. “They were still in the ’40s and ’50s in their minds and wishing it hadn’t happened.”  She sighed a bit. “Too late,” Ms. Childs said, days before an election for which she sounded decidedly less fired up. “It happened.”  It did happen. And then came this.  A New York Times/CBS News poll this month found that 82 percent of voters felt more disgusted than excited about American politics because of this campaign. Ninety-seven percent of Donald J. Trump supporters said a Hillary Clinton presidency would make them scared or concerned. Ninety-five percent of Clinton supporters said the same of a Trump administration.  Photo  Photo  There is a tendency to sanitize bygone political eras in the retelling, to draw straight lines where squiggles belong. Surely some signposts of unrest were discernible many exits ago — the rise in income inequality, scraping away at the middle class; the preponderance of partisan news media; congressional functionality morphing from labored to gridlocked to hopeless.  Such bitter divisions had flared long before Mr. Trump seared his surname onto the democratic process. “Hamilton,” the acclaimed Broadway musical, after all, crests with a fatal gunfight between statesmen.  And for all the rose-colored tributes to John McCain and Mitt Romney, who are now held up by Democrats as exemplars of erstwhile Republican honor and sanity, many Obama supporters once seethed at the sight of them — and, for at least a few months of 2008, of Mrs. Clinton, too.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  So much was bound to get worse before it got better. People lost jobs, savings, homes. Some looked at the president and saw distance, fecklessness, insufficiency. Most were not outright bigots.  Still.  Norms had been threatened before 2016, but never bulldozed with such ease.  Truth has often felt contested, but never so thoroughly subjective.  There have been crusades against political correctness, but never a national reckoning over the propriety of boasting about sexual assault.  “It’s like with family or a friend or someone you’re dating. And you say, ‘Let’s just be honest!’” said George Saunders, the author and essayist, who chronicled Trump supporters for The New Yorker in July. “Then they are, and it’s like, ‘Oh, God.’”  This unburdening has redrawn 2008 as something of a utopia in hindsight, taunting the present with its flights of inspiration, its relative high-mindedness, its basic civility most of the time.  Though Mr. Obama commanded about 53 percent of the popular vote, 74 percent of Americans said they felt positively about his election, according to a Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll in December 2008.  Any present traces of that race register now as dizzying distortions, shards culled from a fun-house mirror.  Mr. McCain’s captivity in combat was invoked by Mr. Trump as an argument against his heroism.  Mr. McCain’s memorably pointed defense of Mr. Obama after a voter labeled him “an Arab” has given way to a Republican nominee advocating a ban on Muslims entering the United States.  Photo  Photo  Mr. McCain, in conceding, hailed the historic moment: “Senator Obama has achieved a great thing for himself and for his country.” Mr. Trump has not committed to accepting the results of the election.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In fact, many Republicans insisted then that they hoped to see Mr. Obama succeed.  But there were two sides in 2008, too, and many millions of voters dismayed at the outcome.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. McCain’s running mate, Sarah Palin, helped coax what became the Tea Party into full bloom — an insurgency that helped spawn Mr. Trump’s own — exporting the boiling anger from her campaign events to a mass audience, even as some McCain aides expressed horror at what they had wrought.  Many conservatives see a through line from Ms. Palin’s treatment by the national news media, which they viewed as unfair and condescending, to the heightened distrust of traditional news sources. This context, they say, can account for the otherwise genial-looking Americans now prone to screaming obscenities at reporters during Trump rallies.  But the fury rings familiar. Those early, menacing shouts from Palin crowds — “Kill him!” or “Terrorist!” at a mention of Mr. Obama — have wafted to the main stage, absorbed and repurposed by the speakers at the microphone. Amid signs and chants demanding Mrs. Clinton’s jailing, wishing her death and denouncing her with unprintable gendered slurs, Mr. Trump has himself wondered aloud about the “Second Amendment people” who might take matters into their own hands if she is elected.  And after years of questioning Mr. Obama’s birthplace — then falsely accusing Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 campaign of having done so first — Mr. Trump has seen to it that his followers would never view a Clinton presidency as legitimate.  Republicans are promising investigations. Voters are predicting impeachment, on vague grounds. Some conservative lawmakers are saying they can make peace with an eight-justice Supreme Court in perpetuity, rather than allowing any Democratic president to fill the tiebreaking vacancy.  The result is a sort of pre-emptive resignation, even among those who admire Mrs. Clinton most, about the scope of her triumph if she wins.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama ascended with impossible expectations, largely of his own making. His preferred successor would take office on the assumption that precious little will be permitted to change.  It is a sobering turn for those overjoyed at the prospect of a female president.  It is also a grim confirmation of Mrs. Clinton’s argument against Mr. Obama in the first place. It was she who, in 2008, seemed to mock the wide-eyed sunniness of his message in the Democratic primary campaign, the self-assurance that sheer force of personality would be enough.  “The sky will open, the light will come down, celestial choirs will be singing,” Mrs. Clinton faux-predicted at one campaign stop, forecasting an Obama presidency, “and everyone will know we should do the right thing and the world will be perfect.”  She shrugged.  “Maybe I’ve just lived a little long,” Mrs. Clinton said then, “but I have no illusions about how hard this is going to be.”
Video  WASHINGTON — Barack Obama claimed the presidency eight years ago in Chicago’s Grant Park, declaring “a new dawn” in American history and promising the enthusiastic crowd of a quarter-million people that “we as a people will get there.”  “Because of what we did on this day, in this election, at this defining moment, change has come to America,” the new president-elect vowed.  But as the nation prepares to choose President Obama’s successor on Tuesday, the bold agenda he described that morning remains incomplete. What Mr. Obama discovered — and what his successor will learn — is that every presidency lasts for only a brief moment in time.  Mr. Obama’s health care bill gave insurance to millions, but he now faces calls for big changes to it. The economy is markedly better, but incomes and growth remain stubbornly low. The immigration overhaul he wanted is tied up in legal limbo, as are his tough new climate rules. Fewer Americans are fighting in overseas wars, but the Islamic State has emerged as a new threat. Partisanship and racial tensions have intensified.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “There is a lot of unfinished business,” said Tom Daschle, the former Democratic Senate leader from South Dakota, a longtime supporter of Mr. Obama. “The satisfaction comes in knowing that he has changed the landscape in a very profound way. The frustration comes in knowing what might have been.”  Mr. Obama recognized the transient nature of his tenure when he spoke eight years ago to the ecstatic crowd in Grant Park. “Our climb will be steep,” Mr. Obama said. “We may not get there in one year or even one term.” More recently, he has started acknowledging that his legacy will be an incremental one. In an article in The Economist, he described the presidency as “a relay race, requiring each of us to do our part to bring the country closer to its highest aspirations.”  Jen Psaki, the White House communications director, said that Mr. Obama had always understood he was part of a continuum. “He recognizes that who he passes the baton to will have a huge impact on whether you build on the progress he made,” she said.  White House aides point to what they call the highlights of that progress: digging the country out of a deep economic recession, rescuing the auto industry, extending health insurance to 20 million people, pressing the world to confront climate change, reducing America’s combat role in two overseas wars.  But for a president who won the highest office in the land by promising big, sweeping change, Tuesday’s election is a reminder that it will be up to someone else to complete the change he long envisioned.  Health care may be the most important example. Passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 drastically reshaped the insurance markets in the country, improving access to medical care. But even Democrats agree that much more needs to be done to improve the cost and quality of that care.  “If this was a football field, I’d put us on the 30-yard line with 70 yards to go,” said Mr. Daschle, who was Mr. Obama’s first pick for secretary of health and human services but withdrew after questions about his taxes.  Mr. Daschle said the unfinished nature of Mr. Obama’s health care program was partly the fault of Republican obstructionism and partly the result of delays that always occur when trying to overhaul such a large social program. The Affordable Care Act gave Mr. Obama’s administration great latitude to reshape the nation’s health care system, and the next president will inherit that same authority.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “That latitude has worked for us,” Mr. Daschle said. “If it’s a Trump presidency, it could work against us.”  The Obama Era Over the next months, The Obama Era will explore the sweeping change that President Obama brought to the nation, and how the presidency changed him.  Climate change, too, remains a work in progress. Internationally, Mr. Obama successfully pressed world leaders to aggressively confront the threats from a warming planet. At home, he demanded tougher fuel standards for cars and imposed new regulations on coal-fired power plants.  But the international agreements Mr. Obama helped forge will play out over decades. It could be years before his environmental regulations are in place, if ever. It will be up to future presidents to navigate the politics of climate change, around the world and here at home.  “Obama has set the stage for both effective domestic and global climate protection,” said Paul Bledsoe, a climate adviser in Bill Clinton’s administration. “But most of the heaviest lifting is going to be done by his successor, especially regarding domestic politics.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Ms. Psaki said the fact that large, developing countries like India and China are addressing climate change is “a tremendous step forward” that Mr. Obama can claim credit for. “Around the world, a number of countries have cemented their goals. It’s not a flash in the pan.”  And yet, Mr. Obama will have long since left office by the time the United States reaches its deadline to significantly reduce carbon emissions in 2025. And much of the rest of the world has pledged to reach its climate goals by 2030, in the fourth presidential term from now.  Mr. Obama concluded his remarks in Grant Park by talking about a 106-year-old African-American woman, Ann Nixon Cooper, who had cast her ballot in Atlanta. He wondered aloud what changes his daughters would see in America if they lived to be the same age. It was, in a sense, a recognition that the consequences of his time in office would be shaped by others long after he left.  “What change will they see? What progress will we have made?” Mr. Obama asked. “This is our chance to answer that call. This is our moment. This is our time.”  For Barack Obama, that time is just about over.
Photo  WASHINGTON — Out of hundreds of thousands of emails seized last month from disgraced former Representative Anthony D. Weiner, a substantial number turned out to be copies of documents already reviewed by F.B.I. agents and analysts, allowing the agency to wrap up in days a review that some had feared would take weeks, if not longer.  The F.B.I. discovered approximately 650,000 emails on a computer that agents had seized while investigating Mr. Weiner on allegations of sexual improprieties. Some of those emails belonged to Huma Abedin, Mr. Weiner’s estranged wife and a top aide to Hillary Clinton.  As it turned out, law enforcement officials said, there was no need to review all of the emails, only Ms. Abedin’s. Those emails numbered in the thousands, and even many of those were duplicates of messages that had been looked at previously, officials said.  That allowed the F.B.I. to sort through the emails faster than many, including some at the agency, had expected.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You can’t review 650,000 emails in eight days,” Donald J. Trump said at a rally on Sunday.  Maybe not, but they didn’t have to. Here’s how federal agents, in the span of a week, could pore over a huge cache of emails and once again conclude that neither Mrs. Clinton nor her aides should face charges related to her handling of classified information on a personal server. The investigation, again, is closed.  How did the F.B.I. read 650,000 emails so quickly?  Taking to Twitter, Michael T. Flynn, a former Army lieutenant general and top Trump adviser, declared it “IMPOSSIBLE” that the F.B.I. could have scanned 650,000 emails in eight days.  But that figure is misleading. When F.B.I. agents seized Mr. Weiner’s laptop, they did discover about 650,000 emails, but only some of them belonged to Ms. Abedin, agents found. They realized that her emails might be relevant to the F.B.I.’s completed investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server, but those were only a small subset of the total.  So how many emails were reviewed?  The F.B.I. has not said precisely, but officials have placed the number in the thousands.  Reading thousands of emails in eight days still seems like a lot of work.  That number got even smaller relatively quickly. Many of the emails were copies of messages that agents had examined earlier while investigating Mrs. Clinton and her aides. Again, it’s not clear how many were duplicates, but law enforcement officials say it was a substantial number. Filtering software can ferret out duplicates from far larger databases than Mr. Weiner’s hard drive. That could have sped up the review, because the duplicates didn’t need to be examined again, but F.B.I. employees would still have had to personally vet new emails.  Was there classified information on the computer?  It is not clear, but that was never the most pressing question. From the beginning, officials said it would take an extraordinary discovery to change their conclusion that nobody should face charges in the case. Prosecutors and agents knew that classified information had been improperly stored on Mrs. Clinton’s server. The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, called it careless but said it did not rise to the level of a crime. Simply finding more classified information would not, by itself, have changed that conclusion.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The F.B.I. has not said what was in the newly discovered emails, but records previously released under the Freedom of Information Act show that Ms. Abedin’s inbox contained mostly scheduling discussions, routine office chatter and the occasional instruction from Mrs. Clinton to print something.  Why didn’t the government tell us this would only take a week?  The F.B.I. was reluctant to predict how long the review would take, repeatedly trying to lower the public’s expectation that it could finish before Election Day. Even though the number of emails seemed manageable early in the week, there was a chance that agents would discover something along the way that would require extensive follow-up.  Attorney General Loretta Lynch and Mr. Comey assigned dozens of agents and analysts to the effort, including investigators who had originally worked on the case. Dozens worked around the clock for a week. Law enforcement officials said the review was completed Sunday morning.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  What now?  While the F.B.I. investigation is closed, Republican members of Congress have said they will not stop looking into Mrs. Clinton’s actions. Representative Jason Chaffetz of Utah, the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, has promised to investigate Mrs. Clinton and said that inquiry could take years.  If Democrats win control of the Senate on Tuesday, they could open an inquiry of their own — into Mr. Comey’s handling of the email investigation.  So what was this whole week about?  It depends on where you sit.  Mr. Comey’s aides say it was about preserving the F.B.I.’s credibility. Had word leaked out that the F.B.I. was reading new emails that might be related to Mrs. Clinton, they say, it would have raised suspicion that Mr. Comey had not been forthcoming when he told Congress in July that the investigation was complete. Democrats and some former federal law enforcement officials say it was all about Mr. Comey, who ignored longstanding guidelines and traditions and plunged the F.B.I. into the presidential race. Had he followed standard Justice Department practices and kept quiet while the F.B.I. did its work, they say, this all could have been avoided.  In the end, though, this was not much about Mrs. Clinton at all. The F.B.I. made its conclusion — careless, but not criminal — months ago, and nothing has changed.  What does this mean for Mr. Comey and the F.B.I.?  Mr. Comey has told aides that he feels no pressure to step down and has no plans to do so, with nearly seven years left in his term. Mrs. Clinton’s surrogates say it would be politically difficult for her to fire him if she is elected. And the White House said Monday that President Obama continued to have confidence in Mr. Comey. But some F.B.I. employees fear that the episode has damaged the bureau’s reputation of being nonpartisan and above the political fray.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Monday refused to intercede in a lawsuit brought by the Ohio Democratic Party against Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign. The justices turned away a last-minute bid from the party to reinstate a sweeping order from a trial judge that had barred the Trump campaign from harassing or intimidating voters in Ohio.  The Supreme Court’s brief order gave no reasons for staying out of the case and did not note any dissents.  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who has been critical of Mr. Trump, added a brief statement explaining her vote in the case, Ohio Democratic Party v. Donald J. Trump for President.  She said that an Ohio law already forbids the harassment of voters, suggesting that a court order to enforce that law was not needed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has urged his supporters to act as poll observers, suggesting that voters in unspecified “certain areas” were likely to engage in fraud.  The Ohio Democratic Party sued the campaign, saying it sought “to vindicate the constitutional rights of voters to exercise the franchise free from intimidation.”  At a hearing on Friday, Judge James S. Gwin of the Federal District Court in Cleveland said that there was no evidence to support Mr. Trump’s assertions concerning voter fraud and that Mr. Trump had used “code words” to urge his supporters to intimidate voters likely to cast their ballots for Hillary Clinton.  “It’s really an incitement to harass Democratic-leaning but more specifically African-American or Hispanic voters,” Judge Gwin said at the hearing.  That same day, Judge Gwin issued a broad order barring people associated with the Trump campaign from harassing, challenging or taking pictures of voters.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The Trump campaign appealed, saying that the order was too broad and that it “tramples upon core First Amendment freedoms.”  “One example illustrates the point,” the campaign’s brief said. “The order prohibits anyone from having a truthful discussion about voting rules with another voter when the two are heading inside to vote. Such a prohibition clearly violates the First Amendment.”  On Sunday, a three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, in Cincinnati, stayed Judge Gwin’s order. The appeals court said Judge Gwin had abused his discretion in issuing it.  Late on Sunday, the Ohio Democratic Party asked the Supreme Court to intervene. It said that the Sixth Circuit had acted without full briefing and that Judge Gwin had acted with care.  Judge Gwin’s order, the party’s brief said, was “tailored precisely to match the evidence in the record of the plans by the campaign and its supporters to disrupt the voting process and intimidate voters.”
Generally, voting is a simple process. Here’s a brief guide on what to expect and how to prepare, based on interviews with election experts.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Before you head out  When and where to vote: In the vast majority of states, polling places open at 6 or 7 a.m. and close at 7 or 8 p.m.  Online tools can help voters find polling locations and hours. They include CanIVote.org, a service maintained by the nonpartisan National Association of Secretaries of State; the League of Women Voters Education Fund’s Vote411.org; and Get to the Polls, a service provided through a partnership between the Pew Charitable Trusts and major internet companies.  (Most secretaries of state and some city and county election officials also provide the information on their websites.)  Lines are generally longest before and after work, and during lunch hours, said Kay Stimson, a spokeswoman for the National Association of Secretaries of State. Voters hoping for a quick trip should head to the polls in the mid- to late morning or midafternoon, she said.  Don’t count yourself out: Are you not registered? Have you been convicted of a felony? Don’t lose hope; you may still be able to vote.  Voter registration deadlines vary, but at least a dozen states and the District of Columbia allow eligible residents to register on Election Day, according to USA.gov. (North Dakotans live in the only state without voter registration.)  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Many states ban those with felony convictions from voting, but the prohibition is not necessarily permanent. Some states restore the right in certain circumstances or after a specified period.  Citizens unsure of their eligibility can check with local officials directly or, in some cases, through the officials’ websites. To find out more, visit CanIVote.org.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  What to bring: Voters should consider whether they need identification and whether to bring notes.  In 32 states, voters must provide a valid form of identification, a requirement that can often, but not always, be fulfilled with a passport or driver’s license, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.  In the remaining 18 states and the District of Columbia, voters can prove their eligibility by providing some combination of a name, address, date of birth or signature.  While it isn’t necessary, reviewing and even filling out a sample ballot may save time and confusion.  Vote411.org and Get to the Polls provide information voters can expect to see at the polls, and local election officials often even provide sample ballots.  Once you get there  Help is available: Voters who need assistance should ask for it, especially those with disabilities or other needs.  By federal law, voters with disabilities have the right to vote privately and independently, and to be aided by workers at polling places.  “Election officials want to accommodate anybody’s needs in that line,” said Wendy Underhill, the director of elections and redistricting for the National Conference of State Legislatures.  States also have hotlines available to assist voters who have Election Day questions or want to report suspicious activity.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In many states, including New York, if you’re in line by the time your polling place’s closing time arrives, you are still allowed to vote.  A lot of last-minute campaigning: While many voters may encounter people advocating for a candidate or issue on the way to the polls, states have various laws limiting how close the campaigning can get.  Where ballot selfies are allowed A patchwork of laws governs photographs from the voting booth. Ill. S.D. Miss. Ala. Mass. Colo. Mich. N.J. N.Y. Kan. Nev. S.C. N.C. Wis. Alaska Calif. Fla. Ga. N.M. Okla. Tenn. Md. Del. Ohio Mo. Tex. Pa. Ark. W.Va. Ariz. Iowa Ore. Idaho Me. N.D. Utah Ky. N.H. Wyo. Va. Wash. Hawaii Mont. Conn. Ind. Neb. Minn. La. Vt. Allowed Not Allowed Unclear IL SD MS AL MA CO MI NJ NY KS NV SC NC WI AK CA FL GA NM OK TN MD OH MO TX PA AR WV AZ IA OR ID ME ND UT KY NH WY VA WA HI MT CT IN NE MN LA VT Allowed Not Allowed Unclear  “Everyone’s supposed to be able to show up and vote free from harassment and intimidation,” Ms. Stimson said.  Such restrictive zones, which are typically marked, range in size from a few feet to several hundred feet, typically from the entrance to the polling location, according to a roundup of state laws compiled by the National Association of Secretaries of State.  Whom you can expect to see: Poll workers and other residents casting ballots are not the only people voters may find at their polling places.  Academic and foreign observers may be there to study how well the election is run, while partisan poll watchers may be reviewing sign-in sheets to know which supporters they still need to turn out, Mr. Diorio said.  None, of course, should disrupt or try to influence the voting process.  There may also be authorized “vote challengers” who can question a voter’s eligibility. Who may raise such objections, and what they may question, varies by state, as the National Association of Secretaries of State’s list of poll watcher and challenger laws shows.  At the voting booth  Read the directions and review your ballot: It may sound obvious, but voters should carefully read instructions and always double-check their selections.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Take the time you need to review your choices and cast the ballot the way you want it to be cast,” Ms. Underhill said.  Voters can ask for replacement ballots if they make a mistake, and are not required to fill the whole thing out, she added.  “This isn’t a test — just vote what you know and are interested in,” she said.  Provisional voting: Voters may cast a “provisional ballot” even if their eligibility is in doubt, though they may be limited in where they can cast such a vote.  For more information, the National Conference of State Legislatures has a detailed briefing on the issue, and state and local election officials and websites should be able to answer any related questions.  Take selfies at your own risk: Voters should be cautious about sharing ballot selfies. As Justin Timberlake found out last month, some states ban them.  According to a review by The Associated Press (and a recent court ruling in California), at least 18 states ban the practice. The laws in a dozen other states are not quite so clear.  The best bet? Follow the lead of Mr. Timberlake’s wife, Jessica Biel, and take a selfie with your “I Voted” sticker instead.
Photo  Shortly after the curtain fell on the 1976 election, Hubert H. Humphrey took his dejected friend Bob Dole, the Republican vice-presidential nominee, out for ice cream to try to improve his mood.  Mr. Humphrey, who had lost a presidential race eight years earlier, told him it would get worse before it got better.  “Today, people will be second-guessing you,” Mr. Humphrey told Mr. Dole, the running mate of Gerald R. Ford, the incumbent president defeated by Jimmy Carter. “They’re going to be looking for someone to blame.”  Then Mr. Humphrey offered a gesture of kindness, Mr. Dole recalled in an interview, telling him, “Let’s talk about tomorrow and your future and move on.”  Mr. Humphrey was speaking to Mr. Dole as a new inductee into an elite but hardly sought-after fraternity: candidates who have endured a failed national political campaign, an experience of loss that some have compared to a death in the family.  After Tuesday’s election, Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton will join those ranks.  For most failed presidential candidates, it is not their first exposure to the intense emotions that come with such a public defeat.  Even so, little else compares to it. President George Bush, who had suffered his share of defeats earlier in his career, wrote in his journal on Nov. 4, 1992, about the exquisite torture of his loss to Bill Clinton: “It’s hurt, hurt, hurt and I guess it’s the pride too.” He reflected wistfully, too, on his failure to embarrass the pollsters. “I was absolutely convinced we would prove them wrong,” he wrote, “but I was wrong and they were right and that hurts a lot.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Having lost the 2000 presidential race after the legal battle over the Florida recount, Al Gore effectively disappeared from public life for several years.  Mrs. Clinton knows a similar feeling, having lost a drawn-out and contentious primary battle to Barack Obama in 2008. “This was not going to be easy for me,” she wrote in her memoir “Hard Choices.” Yet she took little time to nurse her wounds before becoming Mr. Obama’s secretary of state.  In contrast, Mr. Trump is a first-time candidate — and someone who has built his public persona on the idea that no matter the contest, he always comes out a winner.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  He was plainly rattled and off-kilter the night of the Iowa caucuses, when, despite aides’ assurances that he was coasting to victory, he lost the Republican contest to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas.  And Mr. Trump’s behavior on the campaign trail — exulting in his large crowds, maintaining that he holds a lead even when the polls say otherwise — suggests he could have an unusually difficult time handling an undesired result Tuesday night.  “Somebody coming from a successful business to politics, if he should lose — I’m not certain what the reaction would be,” Mr. Dole said. “He must know that somebody’s going to lose.”  Whether Mr. Trump has allowed for the possibility is unclear.  Advisers said he had spoken of nothing but victory.  Former Senator George Allen of Virginia, who lost a close race for re-election in 2006, said both presidential candidates needed to have at least a vague idea of what they would say in the event of a loss. “That’s the responsible thing to do,” he said. “I do think preparation is important.”  Photo  The psychological dimensions of a loss can take a few days to sink in.  “It’s shrouded a bit in the first 24 to 48 hours because you’re recovering from the campaign,” said Rick A. Lazio, the former Republican congressman from Long Island who was the first person to lose to Mrs. Clinton, in the 2000 Senate race in New York.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Pretty soon after that, you’re faced with the reality that your status has changed and your life has changed,” said Mr. Lazio, whose dazed mind-set seemed to have been captured by a memorable photograph of him gazing out the window of his campaign plane after his final Election Day event that year, his eyes fixed on the clouds.  Mr. Dole’s loss to Mr. Clinton in 1996 was less painful than his 1976 defeat, he said, primarily because he considered Mr. Clinton his friend. They “still are friends as far as I know,” said Mr. Dole, the only former Republican presidential nominee to endorse Mr. Trump.  Mitt Romney said his defeat by Mr. Obama in 2012 was less painful than his loss in a 1994 bid to replace Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts.  “That doesn’t make a lot of sense analytically,” Mr. Romney wrote in an email. “I knew I had very little chance of beating him but when the loss actually happened, it was pretty emotional.”  Photo  He said he and his wife, Ann, were in a “funk” for a few months. “We didn’t want to watch the news,” he wrote. “We held back from social engagements. Sometimes emotions don’t make a lot of sense, but that doesn’t mean they’re not real.”  Mr. Allen, the former Virginia senator (he also served as governor), recalled an acute sadness that also overtook his family. He recalled that after an earlier race, a legislative contest that was close, he had contemplated hundreds of things that could have been done differently.  Mr. Lazio’s first loss was compounded by millions of dollars in campaign debt, which consumed him and made it difficult for him to move on.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Gray Davis, who was abruptly forced out of the California governor’s mansion in a recall election in 2003, tried to ignore the sting of defeat by plunging himself into working with his successor, Arnold Schwarzenegger, on the transition. “It hurts,” Mr. Davis said.  But not that much, he added hastily. “Let’s not overstate it — war didn’t break out,” Mr. Davis said. “The stock market didn’t drop a thousand points. No one died.”  “You have to be stoic, but you also have to handle both victory and defeat with grace and gratitude,” Mr. Davis said, calling it a privilege to have had supporters. “This is like a mission. And sometimes it’s successful, and sometimes it isn’t.”  Mr. Trump has referred to his campaign as a movement, but he has also moaned to his supporters at various points that it would be a “big, beautiful and, yes, very expensive waste of time” were he to lose.  Mr. Lazio said the sudden lack of attention could be most jarring.  “I think it’s the crowds that are the major experience that you miss,” Mr. Lazio said. “You don’t get that again unless you’re a candidate again.”
“The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer,” Mr. Trump told supporters around 3 a.m. on Wednesday at a rally in New York City, just after Mrs. Clinton called to concede.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a departure from a blistering campaign in which he repeatedly stoked division, Mr. Trump sought to do something he had conspicuously avoided as a candidate: Appeal for unity.  “Now it’s time for America to bind the wounds of division,” he said. “It is time for us to come together as one united people. It’s time.”  That, he added, “is so important to me.”  He offered unusually warm words for Mrs. Clinton, who he has suggested should be in jail, saying she was owed “a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country.”  Bolstered by Mr. Trump’s strong showing, Republicans retained control of the Senate. Only one Republican-controlled seat, in Illinois, fell to Democrats early in the evening. And Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, a Republican, easily won re-election in a race that had been among the country’s most competitive. A handful of other Republican incumbents facing difficult races were running better than expected.  Mr. Trump’s win — stretching across the battleground states of Florida, North Carolina, Ohio and Pennsylvania — seemed likely to set off financial jitters and immediate unease among international allies, many of which were startled when Mr. Trump in his campaign cast doubt on the necessity of America’s military commitments abroad and its allegiance to international economic partnerships.  From the moment he entered the campaign, with a shocking set of claims that Mexican immigrants were rapists and criminals, Mr. Trump was widely underestimated as a candidate, first by his opponents for the Republican nomination and later by Mrs. Clinton, his Democratic rival. His rise was largely missed by polling organizations and data analysts. And an air of improbability trailed his campaign, to the detriment of those who dismissed his angry message, his improvisational style and his appeal to disillusioned voters.  He suggested remedies that raised questions of constitutionality, like a ban on Muslims entering the United States.  He threatened opponents, promising lawsuits against news organizations that covered him critically and women who accused him of sexual assault. At times, he simply lied.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump’s unfiltered rallies and unshakable self-regard attracted a zealous following, fusing unsubtle identity politics with an economic populism that often defied party doctrine.  His rallies — furious, entertaining, heavy on name-calling and nationalist overtones — became the nexus of a political movement, with daily promises of sweeping victory, in the election and otherwise, and an insistence that the country’s political machinery was “rigged” against Mr. Trump and those who admired him.  Video  He seemed to embody the success and grandeur that so many of his followers felt was missing from their own lives — and from the country itself. And he scoffed at the poll-driven word-parsing ways of modern politics, calling them a waste of time and money. Instead, he relied on his gut.  At his victory party at the New York Hilton Midtown, where a raucous crowd indulged in a cash bar and wore hats bearing his ubiquitous campaign slogan “Make America Great Again,” voters expressed gratification that their voices had, at last, been heard.  “He was talking to people who weren’t being spoken to,” said Joseph Gravagna, 37, a marketing company owner from Rockland County, N.Y. “That’s how I knew he was going to win.”  For Mrs. Clinton, the defeat signaled an astonishing end to a political dynasty that has colored Democratic politics for a generation. Eight years after losing to President Obama in the Democratic primary — and 16 years after leaving the White House for the United States Senate, as President Bill Clinton exited office — she had seemed positioned to carry on two legacies: her husband’s and the president’s.  Video  Her shocking loss was a devastating turn for the sprawling world of Clinton aides and strategists who believed they had built an electoral machine that would swamp Mr. Trump’s ragtag band of loyal operatives and family members, many of whom had no experience running a national campaign.  On Tuesday night, stricken Clinton aides who believed that Mr. Trump had no mathematical path to victory, anxiously paced the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center as states in which they were confident of victory, like Florida and North Carolina, either fell to Mr. Trump or seemed in danger of tipping his way.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mrs. Clinton watched the grim results roll in from a suite at the nearby Peninsula Hotel, surrounded by her family, friends and advisers who had the day before celebrated her candidacy with a champagne toast on her campaign plane.  But over and over, Mrs. Clinton’s weaknesses as a candidate were exposed. She failed to excite voters hungry for change. She struggled to build trust with Americans who were baffled by her decision to use a private email server as secretary of state. And she strained to make a persuasive case for herself as a champion of the economically downtrodden after delivering perfunctory paid speeches that earned her millions of dollars.  The returns Tuesday also amounted to a historic rebuke of the Democratic Party from the white blue-collar voters who had formed the party base from the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt to Mr. Clinton’s. Yet Mrs. Clinton and her advisers had taken for granted that states like Michigan and Wisconsin would stick with a Democratic nominee, and that she could repeat Mr. Obama’s strategy of mobilizing the party’s ascendant liberal coalition rather than pursuing a more moderate course like her husband did 24 years ago.  But not until these voters were offered a Republican who ran as an unapologetic populist, railing against foreign trade deals and illegal immigration, did they move so drastically away from their ancestral political home.  To the surprise of many on the left, white voters who had helped elect the nation’s first black president, appeared more reluctant to line up behind a white woman.  From Pennsylvania to Wisconsin, industrial towns once full of union voters who for decades offered their votes to Democratic presidential candidates, even in the party’s lean years, shifted to Mr. Trump’s Republican Party. One county in the Mahoning Valley of Ohio, Trumbull, went to Mr. Trump by a six-point margin. Four years ago, Mr. Obama won there by 22 points.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mrs. Clinton’s loss was especially crushing to millions who had cheered her march toward history as, they hoped, the nation’s first female president. For supporters, the election often felt like a referendum on gender progress: an opportunity to elevate a woman to the nation’s top job and to repudiate a man whose remarkably boorish behavior toward women had assumed center stage during much of the campaign.  Mr. Trump boasted, in a 2005 video released last month, about using his public profile to commit sexual assault. He suggested that female political rivals lacked a presidential “look.” He ranked women on a scale of one to 10, even holding forth on the desirability of his own daughter — the kind of throwback male behavior that many in the country assumed would disqualify a candidate for high office.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Tuesday, the public’s verdict was rendered.  Uncertainty abounds as Mr. Trump prepares to take office. His campaign featured a shape-shifting list of policy proposals, often seeming to change hour to hour. His staff was in constant turmoil, with Mr. Trump’s children serving critical campaign roles and a rotating cast of advisers alternately seeking access to Mr. Trump’s ear, losing it and, often, regaining it, depending on the day.  Even Mr. Trump’s full embrace of the Republican Party came exceedingly late in life, leaving members of both parties unsure about what he truly believes. He has donated heavily to both parties and has long described his politics as the transactional reality of a businessman.  Mr. Trump’s dozens of business entanglements — many of them in foreign countries — will follow him into the Oval Office, raising questions about potential conflicts of interest. His refusal to release his tax returns, and his acknowledgment that he did not pay federal income taxes for years, has left the American people with considerable gaps in their understanding of the financial dealings.  But this they do know: Mr. Trump will thoroughly reimagine the tone, standards and expectations of the presidency, molding it in his own self-aggrandizing image.  He is set to take the oath of office on Jan. 20.
Photo  AMBRIDGE, Pa. — As the inevitability of Donald J. Trump’s victory played out Tuesday night on a television above Fred’s Divot bar, the men who by day carry pipes, hang drywall and drive locomotives watched the returns with mounting satisfaction.  “He’s killing it — that’s our next president,” said John Gaguzis, 50, who had affixed an “I voted” sticker to the blue uniform shirt he wears in a bottling plant. “We need a change. We’ve got to get rid of the Democrats that support people that don’t want to work.”  Jerry Kormick, a disabled construction worker engaged in a serious darts competition, said he had voted for the first time in his life, at age 37. He never believed polls showing Hillary Clinton ahead, he said, not after visiting friends in rural North Carolina.  Photo  This former steel town west of Pittsburgh was for decades a Democratic stronghold, where Franklin D. Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms are proclaimed on a memorial in the small town park. But industrial decline and what is perceived as too fast cultural change in the country at large has transformed Ambridge and the rest of Beaver County around it, with the yards of faded brick homes presenting a river of Trump signs.  Mr. Trump captured Pennsylvania on the way to the White House, beating Hillary Clinton by one percentage point in the state. But that narrow victory was built with huge margins in places like Beaver County, where Mr. Trump prevailed by 20 points.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Joann and Mark Crano, both retired, switched their registrations to Republican this year after a lifetime as Democrats, and they reeled off the names of many other friends and family members who did likewise.  “In 2008, we were wholehearted Hillary supporters,” said Ms. Crano, who was an elected local official for a decade. “We went to every rally.”  Photo  It was Benghazi that put her over the edge, she said.  For Mr. Crano, a former steelworker who retired after a second career at the Pittsburgh airport, it was abortion and same-sex marriage. “If you’re a Christian, you can only vote for Trump,” he said the day before the election at K & N restaurant. It is one of the few thriving businesses still left on Merchant Street, which old-timers — and there are now mostly old-timers — remember as once so crowded you bumped into people. Now it is largely deserted.  The Cranos were having breakfast beneath a poster of Elvis with several friends, all fierce Trump backers. They painted a desperate vision of America if Mrs. Clinton won, predicting a wave of terrorism by unvetted refugees and a slide into dictatorship.  “I’m going to the bank and taking a bunch of money out and buying a lot of guns and ammo,” said Mr. Crano, a former union leader with a large white beard. “I’m going to protect mine and my family,” he added.  Ambridge, like much of Pennsylvania outside Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, eagerly enlisted in Trump Nation this year. Its largely white, less educated population (15 percent have a college degree) packed a boisterous rally that Mr. Trump held at the local high school.  Photo  “I work for my money, and obviously I work for other people, too,” said Sam Bruno, a street sweeper driver, whose yard was festooned with Trump signs.  On Monday he predicted a Trump landslide. “I just hope Mr. Trump can change our government and stop any terrorism coming into our country,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  A number of Mr. Trump’s supporters in town echoed his talking points, blaming the Affordable Care Act for rising premiums of their employer-provided health care and asserting that Mrs. Clinton wanted “open borders” that would turn the United States into a country as dangerous as Pakistan.  The town is named for the American Bridge Company, whose plant on the Ohio River shaped the steel for the Empire State Building, the George Washington Bridge and the gates of the Panama Canal. The town inspired a Tom Cruise movie, “All the Right Moves,” about a high school football player straining to escape a life in the mills.  Photo  But when American Bridge and a wave of other steel plants in Beaver County shut down in the 1980s, undersold by modern competitors, tens of thousands lost their jobs. Unemployment in the county hit Depression-era levels. Ambridge’s population of 6,850 is down 40 percent from 1970. The population is also grayer and poorer.  “We do about 100 funerals a year, but only 20 baptisms a year,” said the Reverend Joseph A. Carr of Good Samaritan Roman Catholic Church.  Clinton supporters were not invisible but kept their heads down. A radio ad by the Pennsylvania Democratic Party that ran on Sunday during the Pittsburgh Steelers game urged voters to protect gains made for working people, mentioning Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy, but no one on this year’s ballot.  Jack Lefebvre, who seemed to be the only Clinton supporter at Fred’s Divot, kept quiet most of the night as he sat beneath the TV and kept busy on his phone. He showed a Facebook post by his wife, who had canvassed on Tuesday for Mrs. Clinton.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “All went well until we were walking back to the car and a man who I would guess was in his late 50s came out of a store and shouted ‘Hillary for prison,’” Barbara Burgess-Lefebvre had written. He yelled something further using “the P word,” she wrote.  “I whirled around and looked him in the eye and said, ‘You would use language like that in front of a woman?’”  Voting on Tuesday at the Fire Department was heavier than poll workers could ever remember.  Ruth Grassel, who tutors English at a community college, said she had been praying about the election and feared that even though she voted for Mr. Trump, he would not be able to bring the country together.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This has been a very divisive election,” she said. “Whoever wins will have a very difficult time trying to unite the country. That makes me sad.”
In Wisconsin, Mr. Johnson, who had been trailing badly against former Senator Russ Feingold, was aided by an enormous cash infusion from outside groups.  Photo  Democrats appear to have picked up two seats, enough to render the Senate fiercely and narrowly divided but leaving them in the minority. Democrats gained one seat in Illinois with Representative Tammy Duckworth defeating Senator Mark S. Kirk, a Republican. In New Hampshire, Gov. Maggie Hassan claimed victory on Wednesday but with a lead of fewer than 700 votes over Kelly Ayotte, the Republican senator, that contest is far from conclusion.  And in Nevada, Catherine Cortez Masto defeated Representative Joe Heck, retaining the seat for Democrats held by Senator Harry Reid, who is retiring. But they lost their chances at a gain when Evan Bayh, who had served two terms each as governor and senator in the state, lost to Representative Todd Young.  Many races narrowed substantially in the closing weeks, and analysts in both parties predicted that the Senate would be closely divided no matter which party took control.  From the beginning of the election cycle, Republicans were on the defensive in the Senate, where they had far more competitive seats in play than the Democrats. In the House, gerrymandering and the Republicans’ largest majority since the 1930s seemed sure to keep the chamber in their control.  In the Senate, seven incumbent Republicans elected in the Tea Party wave of 2010 seemed particularly vulnerable, but the party had built up something of a buffer with big wins in 2014 that gave it a four-seat majority.  Republicans also benefited from the efforts of Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, who tried to make sure that incumbents did not face the kind of challenges from the right that had bedeviled the party since 2010.  Mr. Toomey, Mr. Burr and Senator and Charles E. Grassley of Iowa all avoided seriously contested primaries, allowing many of them to run as seasoned center-right candidates as opposed to hard-line conservatives. Mr. Rubio also avoided a messy intraparty fight for his seat once he entered the race after his failed shot at the White House.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Republicans’ fear of Mr. Trump’s presidential bid lingered before the votes were tallied. Most starkly, Mr. Toomey, Republican of Pennsylvania, waited until the last possible moment to say that he voted for the Republican nominee after weeks of evading the question.  But in the end, some candidates who rejected Mr. Trump prevailed, others who abandoned him lost and those who tried to avoid the question of his candidacy did fine. Mr. Portman, who started off as a provisional underdog, began an early attack on his opponent, Ted Strickland, the former Ohio governor, over job losses during Mr. Strickland’s tenure. His no-stone-unturned campaign — which even included radio ads in Ukrainian — and a big volunteer network helped him compensate for a less robust turnout operation from the top of the ticket.  The Republican Party’s task appeared to get infinitely more difficult when its voters chose Mr. Trump to head the ticket. Suddenly, the divisiveness was coming not from challengers to the incumbents but from the man running for president who railed against Washington politicians, including many of those seeking re-election.  Most Senate candidates initially remained mum about Mr. Trump’s candidacy, but they were forced, often awkwardly, to react to his many contentious statements.  Mr. McCain and Ms. Ayotte eventually broke with their party’s nominee, saying they could not support his quest for the White House. But Mr. McCain did so not after Mr. Trump insulted him personally or after Mr. Trump offended a Gold Star family, but only when Mr. McCain had obtained a comfortable lead. Ms. Ayotte rejected Mr. Trump after various tortured moments, which cost her support. Mr. Portman stuck to his position of supporting Mr. Trump while largely distancing himself from his remarks.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In Nevada, Mr. Heck, seeking the seat vacated by Mr. Reid, the Democratic leader, renounced Mr. Trump, only to incur a fierce backlash from Trump supporters. Ms. Cortez Masto, who had Mr. Reid’s strong backing, will become the nation’s first Latina senator.  Some themes of the election transcended partisanship. Mr. Blunt, Republican of Missouri, and Mr. Bayh were hit repeatedly for their ties to lobbyists. Mr. Bayh, who began his race with a double-digit lead in polls over Mr. Young, was swamped by negative ads paid for by outside political groups that painted him as out of touch with his state and too in touch with Washington’s insider culture.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The negative tenor of Mr. Trump’s campaign clearly had a significant impact in states where Democratic Party leaders failed to recruit high-wattage candidates for some winnable seats. Still, those candidates ran highly competitive races and in some cases were poised for victory.  Their Pennsylvania recruit, Katie McGinty, held a midlevel position in Bill Clinton’s White House but no major elective office. In North Carolina, former Senator Kay Hagan passed on a comeback, and Democrats settled on Deborah Ross, a little-known lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union.  In Florida, Mr. Murphy was seen as a credible opponent against what started as a disorganized field of Republicans hoping to succeed Mr. Rubio. But once the incumbent jumped back in, Mr. Murphy quickly took criticism for funding his campaign with the help of his wealthy father and for padding his résumé. Democrats, disappointed with his campaign, put their resources elsewhere.  The nation’s Senate races ended in a record level of cash. “Super PACs” and other outside groups spent more than $600 million on behalf of candidates this year, the bulk of it in roughly half a dozen competitive races, according to the Federal Election Commission.  The total surpasses every biennial upward progression of outside money in races since the 2010 Supreme Court decision that determined that the government was prohibited from restricting independent expenditure by groups that can raise unlimited money in political campaigns.
The slashing, freewheeling campaign that took him to the doorstep of the White House replicated a familiar pattern from Mr. Trump’s life, but on an Olympian scale.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The son of a wealthy real estate developer in Queens, Mr. Trump, 70, spent decades pursuing social acceptance in upscale Manhattan and seeking, at times desperately, to persuade the wider world to see him as a great man of affairs. But Mr. Trump was often met with scoffing disdain by wealthy elites and mainstream civic leaders, culminating in a mortifying roast by President Obama at the White House Correspondents Dinner in 2011.  So Mr. Trump fashioned himself instead as a proudly garish champion of the common man — a person of unsophisticated tastes but distinctive popular appeal — and acted the part in extravagant fashion, first in the New York tabloids and then on national television. He became a pundit of sorts, fulminating against crime in New York City and international trade and Mr. Obama’s legitimacy as president, often in racially incendiary terms.  Photo  His candidacy unfolded in much the same way: as the rampage of an aggrieved outsider, aligned more with the cultural sensibilities of blue-collar whites than with his peers in society.  On the first day of his run — June 16, 2015 — Mr. Trump drew a direct parallel between his determined quest for success in New York and his entry into the political arena.  Addressing a crowd made up largely of reporters in the atrium of Trump Tower, Mr. Trump noted that political seers had predicted, “He’ll never run.” Seconds later, he mused that his father, Fred Trump, had urged him never to compete in “the big leagues” of Manhattan.  “‘We don’t know anything about that. Don’t do it,’” Mr. Trump quoted his father as saying. “I said, ‘I’ve got to go into Manhattan. I’ve got to build those big buildings. I’ve got to do it, Dad. I’ve got to do it.’”  Powered by that same grasping ambition, Mr. Trump’s candidacy was marked by countless missteps and grievous errors, from the crude and meandering speeches he delivered daily, to the allegations of sexual assault that appeared to cripple him in the final weeks of the race. No other presidential candidate in memory has given offense so freely and been so battered by scandal, and lived to fight on and win.  Amid all his innumerable blunders, however, Mr. Trump got one or two things right that mattered more than all the rest. On a visceral level, he grasped dynamics that the political leadership of both parties missed or ignored — most of all, the raw frustration of blue-collar and middle-class white voters who rallied to his candidacy with decisive force.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump rallied them less with policy promises than with gut-level pronouncements — against foreign trade, foreign wars and foreign workers. He left his Republican primary opponents agog at his dismissals of mainstream policy, and exposed a yawning breach between the program of tax cuts and fiscal austerity favored by traditional conservatives, and the preoccupations of the party’s rank and file.  Ridiculed by critics on the right and left, shunned by the most respected figures in American politics, including every living former president, Mr. Trump equated his own outcast status with the resentments of the white class.  Photo  Even the invective and incivility that appalled the traditional guardians of political discourse seemed only to forge a tighter bond between Mr. Trump and his inflamed following. He dismissed American social norms as mere “political correctness,” mocking the physical appearance of an opponent’s wife, savaging Hillary Clinton’s marriage and wielding stereotypes of racial minorities — all to the applause of his base.  In sum, Mr. Trump offered himself to the country as a tribune of white populist rage, and pledged at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland to defend “the laid-off factory workers and the communities crushed by our horrible and unfair trade deals.”  “These are the forgotten men and women of our country,” Mr. Trump said. “People who work hard but no longer have a voice.”  He pledged: “I am your voice.”  The message resonated especially in the Midwest, where a stunning victory in Ohio helped give Mr. Trump the Electoral College votes he needed to win. But his ultimate triumph was driven less by region than by race and class. His winning coalition consisted of restive whites and scarcely anyone else.  Mr. Trump’s winding path to the presidency began 10 miles east of the spot where he would build Trump Tower, in the wealthy Queens enclave of Jamaica Estates, where his father’s self-made real estate empire granted Mr. Trump an easy entry into the world of construction and development. He showed little interest in politics as a young man, obtaining deferments to avoid fighting in the Vietnam War but declining to participate in the protest movements of that era.  He found his way into the political arena by way of his commercial interests and social aspirations: Under the tutelage of Roy Cohn, the legendary and infamous former adviser to Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin, Mr. Trump made himself a presence at fund-raising events and political conventions. As early as the 1980s, he insinuated himself into the company of leaders in both parties, giving money to Ronald Reagan as readily as to Mario M. Cuomo, the liberal governor of New York.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But while Mr. Trump earned headlines at that stage mainly for his romantic escapades and business failures — a lurid divorce from his first wife, Ivana, and a series of corporate bankruptcies — even then he gave hints of loftier political goals. In the run-up to the 1988 presidential campaign, he traveled to New Hampshire to give a speech warning of foreign threats to American economic power.  The next year, Mr. Trump stirred fierce controversy in New York by calling loudly for the institution of the death penalty, in the aftermath of a brutal assault and rape in Central Park, though the five young men charged with the crime were later exonerated.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Still, even as he began to campaign in the early presidential primary states, blasting Mexican migrants in acid language and demanding a shutdown of Muslim immigration into the United States, Mr. Trump never entirely shed his image as a boastful but ultimately benign showman.  Republicans of august political lineage, like Jeb Bush, derided him as “an entertainer,” and trusted, in the face of mounting evidence to the contrary, that voters would discard him as such in the end.  Democrats, too, who viewed Mr. Trump as plainly unelectable from the start, acknowledged at times that they might have been wrong to sneer at him early on.  Hillary Clinton, appearing on NBC’s “Late Night With Seth Meyers” last winter, noted that Mr. Trump had initially provoked “hysterical laughter,” before his call for a crackdown on Muslims.  “I no longer think he’s funny,” Mrs. Clinton said.
People tend to focus on the Trump Effect as a pure negative, citing the “normalization” of his coarsening style and what Mitt Romney called the “trickle-down racism and trickle-down bigotry and trickle-down misogyny” that could result from Mr. Trump’s example. But there’s no denying that his scrambling of the political marketplace has been overdue, and perhaps healthy. He proved that a candidate could win a Republican nomination by a wide margin while defying party-line orthodoxy — praising, say, certain aspects of Planned Parenthood, criticizing the Iraq war and freely calling out putative party elders and leaders such as George W. Bush, John McCain and Paul D. Ryan, among others.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  His free use of social media and, until a few months ago, his hyper-accessibility to the news media diminished a political communications racket that has enriched far too many media buyers, ad makers and parasitic consultants of many stripes over the years. For as many outrages as he perpetrated, Mr. Trump’s offhand and compulsive style was a bracing departure from the usual on-message lobotomies that candidates inflict, and millions of voters rewarded him for it.  If campaigns were won on mentions and mindshare, Mr. Trump would have been bored of winning from the moment he rode the Trump Tower escalator into our lives 17 months ago and all sense of political normalcy and decency descended with it. The “Summer of Trump” last year was supposedly a passing spasm, until it gave way to the Fall of Trump, the Winter of Trump, the Party of Trump and whatnot. Can you actually mock someone for being as solipsistic as Mr. Trump is if, in fact, this whole election really has revolved around him?  The sheer exhaustion of this trip he dragged the country on began to assume a life of its own. How would this reality show play out? Or would it? “Can this thing just end, please?” Matt Borges, the Republican chairman of Ohio, pleaded to The Washington Post on the morning after Mr. Trump spent the wee hours suggesting on Twitter that people should check out a sex tape featuring a Latina beauty queen (one of those bizarre yet somehow ho-hum episodes you seemed to confront with pelting regularity in a Trump Election).  Mrs. Clinton was boring by comparison, the hyper-familiar and battle-scarred veteran of the same old political battles — not an easy sell in 2016. Still, for all of her flaws, she executed key candidate requirements with aplomb. Political pros rate somewhere between 50 percent and 70 percent of a nominee’s performance on high-profile, set-piece events: putting on a good convention, performing well in debates and selecting a do-no-harm running mate, all of which Mrs. Clinton did better than Mr. Trump (except possibly for the running-mate selection, which you could call a wash). Her campaign also swamped Mr. Trump in the unsexy areas of field organizing, fund-raising and (by every indication) “get out the vote” efforts, which put her at a decided advantage once the voting began.  The rest of the Clinton package proved discordant with an impatient political moment, devastatingly so at times. Her cautious speeches, teeth-pulling approach to disclosure and inability to be forthcoming about her private email server elicited more of the same headaches the Clintons have been causing for decades. The same Usual Suspects hovered around her campaign like flies at the quadrennial picnic of Democratic entitlement. Reading their hacked emails via WikiLeaks — the secret diaries of Band, Podesta and Brazile — offered a deflating case study in why so many voters wanted this so-called establishment blown to smithereens. It helped explain how Mr. Sanders was able to throw such a scare into Mrs. Clinton during the primaries, and how Mr. Trump was able to come one winnable election away from the seat of Lincoln and F.D.R.  Both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump helped accentuate each other’s best and worst arguments. If you were running as a battering-ram outsider like Mr. Trump, it would be hard to invent a better contrast than the Secretary of Same; if you were running as a safe and familiar grown-up like Mrs. Clinton, who better than Mr. Trump to embody the volatile opposite?  Whatever these wealthy celebrity New Yorkers had in common, their matchup offered a Mars-Venus disconnect from the get-go. They represented perfect generational and cultural archetypes, even caricatures. If there was ever a cartoon male to represent everything Hillary Clinton has ever placed herself in opposition to, it was Donald Trump. She was the Tracy Flick class president to Trump’s “Mad Men”-vintage assumed privilege and male id; she was the Wellesley striver bent on breaking the “glass ceiling” of the tower the likes of Mr. Trump slapped their names on in gold; she was “it takes a village” to the “I alone can fix it” of an unlikely septuagenarian exemplar of the Selfie Generation.  Mr. Trump’s campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again,” did not even pretend to be forward looking (just as Mrs. Clinton’s “Stronger Together” barely attempted to be catchy, inspiring or memorable). It was as if Mr. Trump felt he could backdate himself from the social and political strains that the Clintons and their baby boomer ilk have been in the middle of for the last 50 years. Could a Republican Party whose leadership seemed committed to diversifying its white male base really nominate someone who called Mexicans “rapists” in his announcement speech, described women as “fat” and “ugly” and acquiesced to his own daughter’s being described as a “piece of ass”? But in a way, it was also perfect, right? Because of course the first woman to breach the ultimate men’s sanctum of the American presidency would first have to defeat someone who actually boasted about the size of his penis on a Republican debate stage.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You can’t make this stuff up,” Mrs. Clinton would say as a refrain at her campaign events in the final months of the campaign, usually referring to something Trump-related. It’s a phrase that pretty much anyone who’s watched this campaign could sign on to, from either side — an actual point of unity, something to build on. And it does seem certain that our civic life will be dealing with the fallout from 2016 for a long time.  Usually elections bring a measure of closure on Election Day. There are typically expressions of mutual respect and vows of (or at least nods to) a fresh start. You wonder if anyone will even bother this time, whether we’re entering a long hangover phase or the dawn of a country whose divisions will keep getting only sharper. Is national unity even possible after a campaign in which one candidate threatened to put the loser in jail, and the other consigned half her opponent’s supporters to a “basket of deplorables” (dismissing them as “racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic, you name it”)? Where could the healing possibly begin?  At the very least, I’ll offer a small proposal, take it or leave it. Maybe the purest act of patriotism involves well-meaning citizens redoubling their efforts at being respectful, compassionate and decent in their everyday lives. (On Twitter? That might be pushing it.) It’s what we can control, after all, our small gift to democracy, beyond all the noise and fallout that our politics inflicted in 2016. We toast to our endurance and maybe our resilience, too. We survived the rough trip to Nov. 8, and now we unpack.
Photo  Republicans kept their grip on the House of Representatives on Tuesday, overcoming months of efforts by Democrats to tarnish them by association with Donald J. Trump in what proved to be a grave miscalculation.  With a handful of races outstanding Wednesday morning, Democrats had a net gain of just five seats and were expected to remain in the minority, a position they have occupied since Republicans swept to power in 2010 on a wave of Tea Party fervor.  In the few districts that changed hands, it was not perennially endangered Republicans in typical swing districts who were falling, but rather some incumbents who had been comfortably re-elected in the past.  In an early victory, Democrats toppled Representative John L. Mica, a Florida Republican who had cruised to re-election since coming to Congress in 1993. Mr. Mica was defeated by Stephanie Murphy, a business professor and former national security specialist. Ms. Murphy was able to take advantage of a district that had been redrawn.  In another redrawn Florida district, encompassing St. Petersburg, Charlie Crist, the former Republican governor turned Democrat, defeated Representative David Jolly.  In New Jersey, Representative Scott Garrett, a conservative Republican who just finished his seventh term, lost to Josh Gottheimer, a former Clinton administration speechwriter.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And Democrats eyed Representative Darrell Issa’s once-safe seat in Southern California, hoping to bring down the former chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, one who relished his role as an Obama administration antagonist. By Wednesday morning, his race was still too close to call, with the possibility that it would not be called for days. (The state’s vote-by-mail system allowed voters to postmark their ballots as late as Tuesday.)  There was no doubt that Democrats would pick up seats this year, chipping away at the Republicans’ 247-member majority, their largest since the 1930s. But Democrats ultimately fell well short of expectations. Nonpartisan estimates had anticipated House Democrats could pick up between five to 20 out of about two dozen seats considered up for grabs — most of them held by Republicans.  The possibility that Democrats could gain at least 30 seats and retake the majority was always considered far-fetched.  As it became clear that Republicans could not only hold both chambers but also claim the presidency, Republicans who had braced to lose all but the House began entertaining notions of a sweep. That would open the possibility of the passage of the party’s long-stalled agenda, Representative Tom Cole of Oklahoma said Tuesday night.  “If that happens, then you’ll see a lot of major legislation moving quickly, I think, in January and February,” he said. “We’re going to have to justify a majority like this.”  The volatility of the presidential race infused a dash of unpredictability into the final weeks of the election. As Republicans scrambled last month to respond to a 2005 recording in which Mr. Trump boasted in vulgar terms about sexually assaulting women, the hopes of Democrats soared.  But the wave of Republican losses that Democrats had hoped for proved more a ripple, with vulnerable Republicans like Representative Barbara Comstock of Virginia holding their ground in districts where Mr. Trump’s popularity seemed to be foundering for most of the race.  It appeared the decision by some Republicans to distance themselves from Mr. Trump did not harm them, and perhaps even saved them in some districts. Ms. Comstock, who represents the nation’s wealthiest district, said little about Mr. Trump until the recording became public, becoming one of the first in her party to disavow him because of it. She won a close race after Democrats hammered her for what they said were her policy similarities to Mr. Trump, a strategy employed against other endangered Republicans. Hillary Clinton won her district.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Carlos Curbelo, a freshman representative of Florida, who had been outspoken against Mr. Trump throughout his race, held his seat in a re-election battle that pitted him against Joe Garcia, whom he defeated two years ago. Democrats spent more than $2 million to try to reclaim the hotly contested district. Mr. Trump won his district.  Perhaps more than the strength of their candidates or platform, Republicans have gerrymandering to thank once more for their renewed House majority. After the 2010 census, responsibility for congressional redistricting fell largely to Republican-controlled state legislatures, which clumped voters in districts that would help more from the party get elected.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  What remains is a House remarkably insulated from national electoral swings — a contrast with the founding fathers’ image of a chamber more susceptible to the will of the people, said Michael Li, an expert on redistricting and senior counsel for the Brennan Center for Justice’s Democracy Program.  There were concerns that anything but a Trump victory could present new obstacles for Speaker Paul D. Ryan. During the campaign, many conservative members who backed Mr. Trump expressed frustration with Mr. Ryan, the highest-ranking Republican elected official, for declining to defend Mr. Trump after the release of that 2005 recording.  That frustration has metastasized into mutinous murmurings about blocking Mr. Ryan’s re-election as speaker. Before Election Day, at least a handful of Republicans had declined to say if they will back him in internal leadership elections, scheduled to be held when Congress returns early next week.  But Mr. Trump’s victory is likely to pose its own problems for Mr. Ryan, who became more vocal in his support for his party’s presidential candidate in the final days before the election, mentioning Mr. Trump by name as he urged Americans to vote Republican, up and down the ticket. Though he spoke of reconciliation and unity in his victory speech early Wednesday morning, Mr. Trump is known for his almost uncontrollable need to retaliate for even perceived slights, a fact that could come back to haunt Mr. Ryan.  As the race appeared to be turning in Mr. Trump’s favor, Mr. Ryan gave brief remarks at his own victory party Tuesday evening. He did not mention the man who would soon be president-elect but alluded to the potential for an expectation-defying election for his party.  “This could be a good night for us,” Mr. Ryan said.
Below are snapshots of the day.  Photo  ‘It’s Already Been Rigged’  Robert Richardson walked out of a county government building in Zebulon, N.C., a small town east of Raleigh, with his “I Voted” sticker, and its stylized American flag, affixed upside down on his camel-colored work coat.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He put it on that way on purpose, he said: universal sign of distress.  Race relations in 2016, Mr. Richardson said, were “the worst I’ve ever seem them.” Muslim refugees were coming to the country “unvetted and uninoculated,” and he wondered if it was part of a Muslim plot to take over the world.  “I think it’s already been rigged and the people out here’s been just going through the motions,” he said, nodding toward his polling place.  Mr. Richardson, 56, owned a flooring company for decades until the recession dried up the work. He closed it in 2010. He was a registered Democrat his whole life until this year, when he switched to the Republican Party.  He voted for all of the Republicans on the ticket, including Donald J. Trump, though he had his reservations about Mr. Trump. “I think this will be our last chance to get somebody in there to shake it up enough to get people to pay attention,” he said. RICHARD FAUSSET  ‘I Believe in Equal Opportunity’  Patricia Estrada rose before the sun on Tuesday, said her prayers and then put water to boil for some coffee to start her day. She woke her youngest child so he could get ready for school. She turned on the radio to listen to the morning news.  These were the routines of every other morning, though this was a morning like no other for her. This morning, the 48-year-old homemaker was voting for the first time.  Forty-five years ago, her mother, an American citizen, took her from Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, to Phoenix. But Ms. Estrada had never become a citizen. Voting, she said, “was something I didn’t care for, it didn’t matter.” This year, she said, it did. She became a citizen in the spring and on Tuesday voted for Hillary Clinton.  “I believe in equal opportunity, doesn’t matter if you’re green, purple, brown,” she said. FERNANDA SANTOS  Photo  ‘Go to Church, and Vote’  Children wearing “I Voted” stickers while bounding through the streets of Springfield, Mo., with their parents. A flier for an election night concert bearing a cartoon portrait of Mrs. Clinton with a red X over her face. A chalkboard outside a bar that read: “It’s Nov. 8. Don’t forget to vote. Then come in to relax.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  These are the symbols of Election Day in a relatively small town in the conservative Ozarks. Unlike the hustle and bustle of Election Day in swing states or big cities, this city, population 165,000, exuded Midwestern quaint.  Children had the day off from school, and so parents and their children formed a line outside of a movie theater for matinee shows. Emily Gifford, 41, sat over burgers and fries with her two daughters and husband after they had cast their ballots.  “What’d I tell you guys today is important for you to do,” Ms. Gifford asked her daughters before answering herself. “You should do two things in life: Go to church, and vote.” JOHN ELIGON  ‘Have You Voted Yet?’  Susana Loli, a casino housekeeper and member of the Culinary Union in Las Vegas, subtly jammed her foot into the open front door of a fellow member in the northern suburbs.  “Have you voted yet?” she said. “It’s very close by, at the high school. You want a ride there now?”  A woman in her pajamas on the other side of the barely opened door said she was not going to vote until 3 p.m. Ms. Loli removed her foot, made a note on her clipboard and said “O.K. great, we’ll be back at 3.”  Ms. Loli has been working full time for the union, made up mostly of immigrants and women, since September. Teams have registered voters, driven people to early voting and spent hours trying to persuade undecided or unmotivated union members to vote for Mrs. Clinton.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The American dream — if you work hard you can get it,” said Ms. Loli, who immigrated from Peru in 1990. She walked to the next of 121 front doors she planned to knock on.  “I have a house, I have a pension, my kids went to college. We made it. I don’t want to lose that. We have to fight to keep it. Trump? We’re scared of him.”  DAVE PHILIPPS  ‘Lesser of Two Evils’  By 6:30 a.m., several dozen people had lined up to cast ballots at the Coral Gables Public Library in a well-to-do suburb just south of Miami. Voters, mostly dressed in workout pants and T-shirts, clutched their coffees and their cellphones, while some of them still debated their choices.  Person after person used the same refrain: “Lesser of two evils.”  “I think it’s going to be one of those impulse things,” said Michael Lopez, a cybersecurity consultant.  FRANCES ROBLES  Photo  ‘Difficult for Whoever Wins’  Lissa Matson, a physician, wanted to beat the crowds to the polls, so she arrived at the designated location — the gym of a technology school in Exeter, N.H. — a few minutes before the polls opened at 7 a.m.  So had at least 100 others.  The line of voters, clad in hats and sensible coats to ward off the morning chill, snaked through the parking lot as the climbing sun turned autumn leaves the color of honey.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Thought I would be here before the crowd, but I guess not,” Ms. Matson said.  But soon the line was moving quickly, and the first voters trickled out.  “I’m anxious for change,” said 61-year-old Paula Perry after casting her vote for Mr. Trump and other Republicans here, including Senator Kelly Ayotte, who is in a tough re-election fight.  Bill Batal, 63, a retired financial analyst, chose all Democrats. “She has the most experience,” said Mr. Batal, a registered Democrat, of Mrs. Clinton. “The other guy doesn’t know what he’s doing.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Batal said he wondered when the nation would ever feel unified.  “I hope it’s going to bring the country together,” he said, “but I’m afraid it’s so polarized, it’s going to be very difficult for whoever wins.” JESS BIDGOOD  ‘This Whole Thing Was a Mess’  Election Day had been a time of mixed emotions for Myriam Marin, a 60-year-old engineer at a global company. She had come to the United States 35 years ago from Argentina, and because she was not a citizen, she never voted. She felt guilty.  “I didn’t become a citizen, by choice, until Obama,” said Ms. Marin, at the polling station at Crockett Elementary School in Houston.  “I didn’t feel like I belonged here,” she said. “It took that long for me to get where I am now. Obama was probably my inspiration.”  On Tuesday, after she voted for Mrs. Clinton, she said it felt good not to feel guilty on Election Day. But she also found it hard to feel the patriotism she felt in 2008. “I had lots of terrible arguments with family and friends,” she said. “I think this whole thing was a mess.”  MANNY FERNANDEZ  Photo  ‘She’s Getting a Bad Rap’  The cinnamon roll entrance poll in Harmony Township, Pa., was pointing to a big turnout in battleground Pennsylvania.  By 8:05 a.m., the 40 dozen salad-plate-size rolls from Oram’s bakery for sale outside the voting booths to raise money for the volunteer fire department were all gone.  P. J. Shotter, a voter who arrived at the polling site just after the last roll was sold, was downcast. “This is my reward,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Shotter said she still had not made up her mind but was leaning toward Mrs. Clinton. Both her sons, 18 and 23, were Trump supporters. The household has been a battleground, she said.  “I like Hillary because she’s a caring individual,” she said. “Like I just told my younger son, she’s getting a bad rap, especially with the emails. It’s like a witch hunt.”  A volunteer packing up the cinnamon roll table took pity on Ms. Shotter, handing her one from a private stash.  TRIP GABRIEL  ‘He’s Been Attacking Us’  Elvira Flores arrived at the voting booths from her home in south Los Angeles with her 2-year-old grandson in her arms. She had immigrated from Guatemala more than 20 years ago.  “He’s been attacking us,” she said of Mr. Trump. “But little by little, we have fought back. Those of us who can are becoming citizens and voting for those who cannot. We want to have opportunities.”  “I have hope that the country will get better for people like us,” she added. “These have been hard times, we all know people who have been deported or have lost their jobs. But voting, this is one thing I can do to show I am hopeful.”  JENNIFER MEDINA  Photo  ‘Some Really Terrible Stuff’  In the playground in Lafayette Hill, Pa., just north of Philadelphia, Tara Turzi watched over her 6-year-old twin sons on Tuesday at midday and lamented the tone of the campaign.  “I’ve had to constantly shut the television off,” Ms. Turzi said as she tried to corral the energetic boys. “They’ve been exposed to some really terrible stuff in those ads, on both sides.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Turzi, 43, who teaches English composition at a local community college, voted for Mrs. Clinton; her sister is voting for Mr. Trump. They don’t talk about it. She is white, but teaches many students who are minorities. The election is all the students talk about.  “Those who do support him feel very strongly,” she said. “Those who don’t are sort of outraged.” She encouraged all of them to vote.  Ms. Turzi herself thought she might vote Republican this year and turned to Mrs. Clinton only because Republicans nominated Mr. Trump, who she thinks “stands for racism and sexism.” And she liked the idea of a woman in the Oval Office.  “I’m excited that my boys are going to see that, so young, and be raised in a world where anybody can be president – for real.” SHERYL GAY STOLBERG
Photo  WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Tuesday weighed whether cities can sue banks under the Fair Housing Act for predatory lending, even if foreclosures that stem from such loans affect a city only indirectly.  The case before the justices was brought by Miami after the 2008 financial crisis. The city said that discriminatory mortgage lending practices by Bank of America and Wells Fargo had led to a disproportionate number of defaults by minority home buyers and, in turn, to financial harm to the city.  “We are aggrieved in every sense of the word by the discrimination that was propounded here,” said Robert S. Peck, a lawyer for the city.  The justices appeared divided over whether Miami’s asserted injuries were enough to allow it to sue under the housing law.  Justice Elena Kagan said the law was a “distinctive kind of anti-discrimination statute, which really is focusing on community harms.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Here the cities are standing up and saying, ‘Every time you do this redlining and this reverse redlining, essentially a community is becoming blighted.’ And who better than the city to recognize that interest and to assert it?” she asked.  Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. appeared to disagree, telling Mr. Peck that the harms Miami claimed to have suffered were secondhand.  “Your injuries are derivative of the injury to the homeowners who had the subprime mortgages and who suffered the foreclosure and so on,” the chief justice told him. “I understand your argument that you’re down the line, but I don’t see how you can say that your loss of property taxes is a direct injury.”  Justice Anthony M. Kennedy also appeared skeptical of aspects of the city’s arguments. “The statute doesn’t prohibit decreasing property tax values,” he said.  Other justices worried that a ruling for Miami would allow all sorts of people and entities to sue for indirect harm from discriminatory practices. Justice Kagan asked about restaurants and dry cleaners, Justice Sonia Sotomayor about corner grocers and Justice Stephen G. Breyer about “a magazine that writes about successes in integration and wants to write about this community before it got wrecked or whatever.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Curtis E. Gannon, a lawyer for the federal government arguing in support of the city, offered a limiting principle. He said people, businesses and local governments hurt by a decline in property values ought to be able to sue under the housing law.  The law allows suits from “aggrieved persons.” No one disputed that cities may sometimes count as persons in a legal sense, but Neal K. Katyal, a lawyer for the banks, said Miami was not aggrieved just because it asserted an indirect financial injury.  He said the city had tried to piggyback on the borrowers’ interest in being free from discrimination and had “cut and paste” their grievances into its lawsuit.  Miami’s asserted injuries were too remote, Mr. Katyal said, calling the city’s legal theory “six-step liability.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You have to have discriminatory loans,” he said. “Those discriminatory loans have to lead to defaults. The defaults have to lead to foreclosures. The foreclosures need to lead to increases in vacancies. The increase in vacancies needs to lead to reduction in property values.”  Mr. Peck, the city’s lawyer, said its harm was more direct.  “The banks’ practice of providing minority borrowers with more expensive and riskier loans than they qualified for, or that nonminority borrowers received, actually frustrated and counteracted the city’s efforts on fair housing,” he said.  The court heard a single hour of argument in two consolidated cases, Bank of America v. Miami, No. 15-1111, and Wells Fargo v. Miami, No. 15-1112.  A trial court dismissed the suits in 2014, saying the city had not demonstrated that its claims were covered by the housing law. The United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta, reversed those rulings last year, allowing the cases to proceed. The appeals court said it was enough for the city to contend that it had “suffered an economic injury resulting from a racially discriminatory housing policy.”  A 4-4 tie in the Supreme Court, which seemed a viable prospect on Tuesday, would leave the appeals court’s ruling in place, handing a victory to Miami but setting no national precedent.
Photo  The social and political fissures that have left Americans walled off from one another along lines of race, class, education, gender and geography played out in stark ways in this election, a contest that left people pessimistic about the future of their country and uninspired with their choices of who should lead it.  Eight years after the election of the first African-American president held the promise of breaking down the country’s deep and longstanding racial divisions, American society seemed as polarized as ever, according to surveys of early voters and exit polls conducted by Edison Research.  One thing most voters shared was an overriding sense of disgust, even if they were split bitterly over which candidate repelled them more. Significant numbers of voters said the thought of either candidate in the White House frightened them.  Donald J. Trump’s coalition was overwhelmingly white, and leaned toward male and older voters. He won whites without college degrees by more than two to one — a larger margin than any candidate since at least 1980. His support from rural voters was nearly double Hillary Clinton’s.  Mrs. Clinton was lifted, by contrast, by women, urban voters and those with more education. She also held onto the people who formed the backbone of President Obama’s coalition in both 2008 and 2012, though in lesser numbers: blacks, Hispanics, unmarried women and young voters.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Neither candidate was viewed favorably; more than half of voters saw Mrs. Clinton unfavorably and six in 10 had an unfavorable opinion of Mr. Trump.  Photo  The quality that mattered most to voters was the ability to bring needed change, cited by nearly four in 10 voters. Mr. Trump won these voters by a huge margin. Experience and good judgment were each cited as the most important quality by about one in five voters, and Mrs. Clinton won these voters by large margins.  Close to four in 10 said they would be scared if Mr. Trump were elected; three in 10 said the same about Mrs. Clinton.  Uneasiness extended well beyond the state of politics. Americans expressed concern about their financial well-being, their children’s futures and the fitness and trustworthiness of their leaders.  Three in five voters said the country was seriously on the wrong track and about the same number said the economy was either not good or poor. Two-thirds said their personal financial situation was either worse or the same as it was four years ago. About one in three voters said they expected life to be worse for the next generation.  Mr. Trump’s unusual assault on the impartiality of the country’s elections appeared to have an effect, but mostly among his supporters. Nearly seven in 10 of Mrs. Clinton’s voters were very confident that the votes in their state would be counted accurately. But fewer than three in 10 of Mr. Trump’s supporters said they were very confident.  Some demographic trends seem to be hardening. Twelve years ago, George W. Bush made inroads with Hispanic voters who many Republicans confidently said would form the basis of an enduring conservative majority. But today’s Republican Party is repelling them. Mr. Trump’s performance among Hispanics, at 29 percent of the vote, was similar to Mitt Romney’s in 2012, but far below Mr. Bush’s 44 percent support in 2004.  Americans were in a foul mood about the state of their country’s politics. Nearly half of voters were dissatisfied with the way the federal government is working and another quarter were angry. Only a quarter were satisfied, and far fewer were enthusiastic.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The results contained warning signs for Republicans, who concluded after the 2012 election that changing demographics would reduce them to a permanent minority party unless they improved how blacks and Hispanics viewed them.  Mr. Trump’s nomination seemed only to exacerbate those trends, with his hostility toward many foreigners, his refusal at times to dissociate himself from avowed racists and his plan to ban Muslims from entering the United States.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Most voters rejected one policy proposal Mr. Trump vowed to pursue from the beginning and never backed away from: building a wall on the southern border with Mexico. A majority opposed that plan. Seven in 10 said that most undocumented immigrants working in the United States should be offered a chance to apply for legal status.  Immigrants who have become citizens favored Mrs. Clinton by a ratio of two to one.  Though immigration or terrorism did not rank at the top of most voters’ concerns, the majority of voters who said immigration or terrorism was their top issue favored Mr. Trump.  Most voters who cited the economy or foreign policy as top priorities backed Mrs. Clinton, seemingly rejecting Mr. Trump’s insistence that his business background gave him a superior set of negotiating skills.  A majority of voters said they approved of the job Mr. Obama was doing as president, and those voters backed Mrs. Clinton by huge margins.  But neither Mr. Trump nor Mrs. Clinton inspired voters in the way that Mr. Obama did. Four in 10 voters said they strongly favored the candidate they supported, and a quarter of voters said they were motivated by dislike for the other candidate. In 2012, about two-thirds of voters said they strongly favored their candidate.
To some degree, this is fully predictable. In recent decades, 40 percent to 50 percent of eligible voters have failed to turn out in presidential election years. Given this campaign season, where new depths were always found to plumb and old standards to undercut, this relatively low turnout seemed likely to hold.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Echoing a common analysis, Catherine Bonneville, 63, a retiree in Phoenix, described the choice as between “despicable” (Donald J. Trump) and “untrustworthy” (Hillary Clinton).  “I voted for sheriff. I voted for senator. I voted for county recorder and for judges,” Ms. Bonneville said. “I couldn’t in good conscience vote for president.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But this was also an election season of ever higher and more terrifying stakes, a street-corner duel of end-times prophets. Mrs. Clinton and her supporters saw a nightmare in Mr. Trump’s apparent lack of interest in longstanding international arrangements, his glibness about the use of nuclear weapons and the unrepentant white nationalism of some of his fans. Mr. Trump, for his part, spoke of apocalypse now, painting contemporary America as crime-plagued (a claim not especially true) and economically stagnant (a better grounded one), and at the edge of an irreversible decline.  Among Trump supporters, the extent of this doomsaying may have had the opposite of its intended effect.  On Monday night, Adrian Trusca, 28, was sweeping the floors of a bar in downtown Raleigh, N.C., not far from the college campus where Mrs. Clinton would soon hold a midnight rally. He said he liked the idea of Mr. Trump, an outsider smashing up what seemed like a cozy insider’s game. But Mr. Trusca saw that game as being so hopelessly fixed that he did not see his vote being counted — even here in one of the most closely contested swing states in the country.  The electronic voting machines, Mr. Trusca said, were controlled with software that allows a certain “they” to override the will of the voters.  “They, being the elite,” he explained. “The elite being the Democrats. The people that literally party together, and they run society, because they run the government.”  The notion that some secretive group is deciding electoral outcomes was also echoed by Trump supporters elsewhere, including some from more unexpected sources than Mr. Trusca.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “They already know who is going to be president,” said Chris Starks, 27, as he sat outside an apartment complex in a gritty part of Tallahassee, Fla. “They just want us to feel like we’ve got a say-so.”  Video  Mr. Starks, who is black, said that if he had voted, he would have reluctantly followed the lead of his parents, who supported Mr. Trump. His wife, Charlene, 26, who sat atop an air-conditioning unit with her infant daughter at her side, said she would have voted for Senator Bernie Sanders if he had won the Democratic nomination. But she had no love for the two candidates that they — apparently a different “they” from the ones lined up against Mr. Trump — had ultimately put up.  “They put the race against two people who nobody wanted to vote for,” she said.  Not to decide, of course, is to decide, and this was precisely the point for Carolyn Blanks Mayes, whose front yard in Mobile, Ala., was scattered with signs that read: “African-American’s Don’t Vote November 8, 2016 Presidential Election.” This message was also on a T-shirt her sister was wearing, on the passenger door of her car and in the fliers that she and her sister had given out on city sidewalks every chance they had.  This anticampaign, which Ms. Mayes said was a year old, was not based on the rejection of any particular candidate, or even the political process itself. She voted twice for Mr. Obama but has resisted calling him the first black president because his mother was white. She just wanted to send a message, and she saw this as the first step.  “It doesn’t matter who’s running, they’re going to ignore us,” Ms. Mayes said, as she stood in her yard and talked of extending the boycott to public schools and Christmas shopping. Nothing she had heard about Mr. Trump or Mrs. Clinton made her change her mind, nor did her calls to reject voting change her conviction that federal officials needed to be more involved in local matters.  “You disrespect us all these years,” Ms. Mayes said, “we’re going to disappoint you.”  The number of those like Ms. Mayes, who could vote and chose not to, is quantifiable, and that number may say something about the depths of cynicism in the electorate. But there is another number, an incalculable one, made up of a much quieter constituency: those who desperately want to vote and cannot.  Outside a two-story Spanish-style home in Los Angeles, just blocks away from a polling place that discharged a steady stream of people wearing “I voted” stickers, Juan Manuel Campos worked arranging bricks while fellow workers laid cement.  Mr. Campos, an immigrant from El Salvador, had paid close attention to the election over the past months, watching Mr. Trump’s invectives against illegal immigration each night on the Spanish-language news. He had urged cousins and friends to vote, and he felt certain they would. Perhaps, he said quietly, by the next presidential election, something would change and he could cast a ballot himself.  But not this year, not as an undocumented immigrant.  “My life is in everyone else’s hands right now,” Mr. Campos said, wiping the sweat from his brow. “I only can wait.”
Photo  MIAMI — Senator Marco Rubio, who stumbled badly in a bid for the Republican presidential nomination and then jumped back into the race for his Senate seat, was re-elected on Tuesday to a second term.  The senator, a Cuban-American conservative, fended off a forceful challenge by Representative Patrick Murphy, 33, a Democrat who consistently portrayed Mr. Rubio as an absentee lawmaker with misplaced allegiances — first to the presidency instead of to his job, and then to Donald J. Trump.  In an election pitting two young, ambitious strivers, Mr. Rubio, who had vowed not to seek re-election to the Senate, was by far the better-known, better-financed candidate. Mr. Rubio began his career in the Florida Statehouse, where he became speaker. But the race proved surprisingly tight as Mr. Rubio, 45, struggled to characterize his support for Mr. Trump, his onetime opponent in the presidential primary contests. Mr. Trump bested Mr. Rubio in the Florida primary and ridiculed him as “Little Marco.” Even as Mr. Rubio endorsed Mr. Trump, who is highly unpopular among Hispanics, a crucial constituency for the senator, he mostly avoided mentioning him on the stump.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  A moderate South Florida congressman, Mr. Murphy was depicted by Mr. Rubio as overprivileged and overly reliant on his father’s fortune and connections. Mr. Murphy, one of the youngest candidates to run in a high-profile Senate race, was in turn accused of inflating his résumé and accomplishing little in Congress during his two terms.  The two candidates took opposite tacks on a number of issues, with Mr. Murphy supporting abortion rights, a minimum-wage increase, the Affordable Care Act and an end to the United States’ economic embargo on Cuba.
Photo  PHILADELPHIA — Senator Patrick J. Toomey, a first-term Republican and staunch fiscal conservative who struggled to distance himself from Donald J. Trump, won his bid for re-election on Tuesday, in a blow for Democrats who had hoped to put Katie McGinty in office as Pennsylvania’s first female senator.  Mr. Toomey’s victory in this battleground state was a relief to Republicans who had feared he might become a casualty of the Trump campaign.  The race was the most expensive Senate contest in the nation. Mr. Toomey, 54, who once ran the free-market advocacy group Club for Growth, pitched himself to voters as a bipartisan deal maker, highlighting his effort to close loopholes in criminal background checks for gun buyers after the 2012 massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut.  Ms. McGinty, 53, a former aide to Gov. Tom Wolf and a onetime environmental adviser to President Bill Clinton, cast herself as a pro-business environmentalist and ran on a traditional Democratic platform, supporting abortion rights and an increased minimum wage.  With control of the Senate at stake, money poured in from outside groups, and spending topped $118 million, the Center for Responsive Politics reported.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Each side attacked the other on ethics; Republicans accused Ms. McGinty of using political ties to funnel business to a company where her husband worked as a consultant. Democrats accused Mr. Toomey of conflict of interest, holding stock in a bank of which he had been a founder while fighting new banking regulations.  But Ms. McGinty went into Election Day with a slight edge as the race tested whether Mr. Toomey could survive “the Trump drag,” said Jennifer Duffy, a nonpartisan analyst for The Cook Political Report. The senator never endorsed Mr. Trump and repeatedly ducked questions about whether he would vote for him.  On Tuesday, an hour before the polls closed, Mr. Toomey revealed that he had done so.
Photo  LAS VEGAS — After a close race fueled by record outside spending, Catherine Cortez Masto, a Democrat, won the Nevada Senate contest on Tuesday to become the first Latina senator. She defeated Representative Joe Heck to fill the seat of Senator Harry Reid, the Democratic minority leader, who is retiring after three decades in the Senate. Outside groups spent nearly $90 million on the tight race, but the biggest factor might have been Donald J. Trump.  Ms. Cortez Masto, 52, a former Nevada attorney general and the granddaughter of a Mexican immigrant, focused her campaign on immigration overhaul and future Supreme Court picks before the Senate. She capitalized on the extensive ground operation built by Hillary Clinton and energized Latinos by railing against Mr. Trump’s plan to build a border wall, while trying to pin Mr. Trump’s most controversial views on her opponent.  Mr. Heck, 55, a physician and Iraq war veteran, tried to emphasize a record of across-the-aisle compromise. But he was tripped up by Mr. Trump’s statements on immigration, veterans and women, observers said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Heck started off critical of Mr. Trump during the primary contests, then threw his support behind him after his nomination, only to call in October for Mr. Trump to step down.  “He was doing a good job trying to thread the middle and not alienate the base until the whole Donald Trump thing,” said David Damore, a professor of political science at the University of Nevada. “Then it was like he couldn’t say anything right.”  Mr. Heck relied on the financial backing of groups outside the state — including money from the conservative activists Charles G. and David H. Koch.
Photo  INDIANAPOLIS — Indiana voters on Tuesday spurned Evan Bayh, a well-known Democrat, in his quest to return to the Senate, instead electing Representative Todd Young, a Republican who found success portraying Mr. Bayh as an interloper tainted by too much time in Washington.  Democrats had viewed Mr. Bayh’s candidacy as a prime opportunity to claim an open Senate seat that had been held by a Republican, Dan Coats, and bolster their efforts to gain control of the chamber. Indiana voters are familiar with the Bayh name: Mr. Bayh was popular during stints as governor and senator, and his father, Birch, also represented the state in the Senate.  But in addition to funding for Mr. Young’s campaign, Republicans and their allies unleashed $23.5 million in spending against Mr. Bayh. Mr. Young, who represents part of southern Indiana, found success framing Mr. Bayh as an outsider whose connections to Indiana had eroded. Mr. Bayh, 60, who left Congress about six years ago, did not help matters when he gave an interviewer the wrong address of the Indianapolis condominium he claims as his home. His work as a consultant for a lobbying firm was also scrutinized closely.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Evan Bayh had his chance, but he put money ahead of us,” Mr. Young, 44, a former Marine, said in one advertisement.  Mr. Bayh sought to portray himself as a moderate with deep Indiana roots, pledging to “reject the extremes of both parties.” He appeared in one ad playing driveway basketball, one of the state’s favorite pastimes, with his sons. But the comment section of that video underscored Mr. Bayh’s challenge in returning home. “Wonder whose driveway you borrowed,” wrote one viewer.
Photo  PHOENIX — Senator John McCain on Tuesday survived one of the most bruising election seasons of his long political career, fending off a challenge from his Democratic rival, Representative Ann Kirkpatrick, to secure a sixth term representing Arizona in Washington.  Mr. McCain, 80, weathered a revolt from the right within the Republican Party. And he found himself in an awkward relationship with Donald J. Trump, who last year mocked Mr. McCain’s military service and years as a prisoner of war in Vietnam, saying: “He was a war hero because he was captured. I like people who weren’t captured.”  Mr. McCain nonetheless endorsed Mr. Trump, justifying his decision not as a personal choice but as a matter of respect for his party. His support was fleeting. He withdrew it last month, prompted, he said, by Mr. Trump’s “demeaning comments about women and his boasts about sexual assaults.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Ms. Kirkpatrick, 66, embraced the positions pushed by Hillary Clinton, banking on support from Latino voters, moderate independent voters and disaffected middle-of-the-road Republicans to propel her to victory.  Mr. McCain was buoyed by a deep campaign war chest and by help from the Republican establishment. Last week, Mitt Romney, the party’s nominee in 2012, stumped for him in Arizona.  Mr. McCain seized on Ms. Kirkpatrick’s support of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act as a main point of attack. In ads, his campaign assailed her for calling her vote for the program her “proudest moment” in Congress and declared her “too liberal for Arizona.”
Photo  MIDDLETON, Wis. — Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, a Republican, on Tuesday fought off a challenge from former Senator Russ Feingold, retaining his seat in a Senate race critical to Republicans.  For more than a year this election cycle, Mr. Feingold appeared to be coasting to victory, with polls showing him holding a double-digit lead over Mr. Johnson, 61, a former manufacturing executive regarded as the most conservative of the blue-state Republicans elected in recent years. They sparred over campaign finance, Mr. Feingold’s signature issue during his time in the Senate; the Affordable Care Act, which Mr. Feingold supported; and the economy in Wisconsin, where job growth has trailed its neighbors. Mr. Feingold said Mr. Johnson’s decisions had imperiled jobs in the state. Mr. Johnson called Mr. Feingold, 63, a “career politician,” and even some former Feingold supporters said they wondered if he were overstaying his welcome.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But as the campaign drew to a close, the candidates were locked in a tight race, a Marquette University poll found, after some Republican groups had already pulled television advertising to run in the state.  An influx of money in the last weeks of the campaign, totaling about $20 million, seemed to have an effect, as did Mr. Johnson’s attempt to soften his image with television ads portraying him hugging constituents and changing a diaper.
Photo  RALEIGH, N.C. — Senator Richard M. Burr held off a well-funded challenge on Tuesday from Deborah Ross, a Democratic former state director of the American Civil Liberties Union who sought to portray the incumbent, a 20-year Republican veteran of the House and Senate, as an out-of-touch Washington insider.  Ms. Ross, 53, a lawyer who served from 2003 to 2013 in the State House of Representatives, blasted Mr. Burr, 60, early in the race as a self-dealing politician who exemplified a dysfunctional Washington. She also criticized him for continuing to support Donald J. Trump after his vulgar comments about women became public, and for being named to Mr. Trump’s “national security advisory council.”  Late in the campaign, Ms. Ross called attention to an Oct. 29 recording of Mr. Burr in which he said he was “a little bit shocked” that a National Rifle Association magazine with a picture of Hillary Clinton on it did not have a bull’s-eye over the candidate. On the tape, Mr. Burr also vowed that if Mrs. Clinton were elected, he would work to keep her from filling the vacancy on the Supreme Court.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Burr, known for wearing shoes without socks in the Senate, worried some Republican leaders with his decidedly mellow attitude toward campaigning. But both sides viewed Ms. Ross as vulnerable because of her A.C.L.U. background, and the National Republican Senatorial Committee blanketed the airwaves with ads claiming that Ms. Ross opposed a state sex offender registry, an allegation Ms. Ross strongly rebutted.  In a state with numerous military bases and veterans, Mr. Burr, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, emphasized his national security credentials, trumpeting, among other things, a bill he had sponsored that would prevent President Obama from closing the detention center at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
Photo  CHICAGO — Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois, who had been seen as perhaps the most imperiled incumbent Republican in the Senate, on Tuesday lost his job to Representative Tammy Duckworth, putting both of the state’s Senate seats in the control of Democrats.  Mr. Kirk, a centrist Republican with bipartisan alliances, has long walked a delicate line in a state that tends to vote for Democrats, especially in presidential election years. It is a model that has seen success in Illinois in past decades but that has grown increasingly tangled in this battering election year. Some of Mr. Kirk’s stances have appealed to Democrats and independents (he has supported gay rights, for instance), but he has risked annoying his Republican base along the way. (He said he would support Donald J. Trump if he were the party’s presidential nominee but then backed away from him.)  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  It did not help Mr. Kirk’s chances that only days before the election, he seemed to denigrate the background of Ms. Duckworth, 48, a military veteran who lost her legs in the Iraq war after the Black Hawk helicopter she was co-piloting was shot down by a rocket-propelled grenade in 2004. Ms. Duckworth was born in Bangkok to a Thai mother of Chinese descent, and her father was a Vietnam War veteran. She has been in the House since 2013 and worked for the Department of Veterans Affairs before that.  The re-election effort of Mr. Kirk, 57, a former Naval reservist who previously served in the House of Representatives, was complicated by a medical problem. Mr. Kirk had a stroke in January 2012, and he was sidelined for about a year during his first term in the Senate to undergo operations and rehabilitation.
In North Carolina and 11 other races for governor’s offices and in more than 5,900 for state legislative seats, Democrats had hoped on Tuesday to take back some of the vast ground they have lost to Republicans over the last half dozen years as they swept through state capitals. Yet, regardless of the eventual outcome in North Carolina, it appeared that Republicans actually made at least some additional gains, including two governor’s offices, in Missouri and Vermont, and in state Legislatures in Kentucky and Iowa.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Missouri, Eric Greitens, a former member of the Navy SEALs, won the governor’s office, turning over control of the seat to Republicans and easing the way, Missouri Republicans say, for more conservative legislation to clear the state capital.  Mr. Greitens, who has portrayed himself as an outsider whose lack of political experience should be viewed as a benefit, beat Chris Koster, the state’s Democratic attorney general, who has decades of experience in Missouri politics. Mr. Koster’s current brand of politics — as a conservative Democrat — had proven successful in past statewide elections in Missouri.  The incumbent, Gov. Jay Nixon, a Democrat who was barred by term limits from running again, had been viewed as a check on the state’s Republican-held legislature and its efforts to pass measures such as legislation barring unions from collecting fees from all workers.  And in Vermont, the Democrats lost another governor’s office they had held, when Phil Scott, the Republican lieutenant governor, won. He beat Sue Minter, a Democrat and a former state transportation secretary, in a tight contest to succeed Peter Shumlin, a Democrat who did not seek re-election. “We’re going to make the economy and affordability Montpelier’s top priorities,” Mr. Scott said, declaring victory late on Tuesday.  While an unusually large portion of the governor's seats were open, the result of term limits and candidates who chose to seek other offices, many of the seats did not change partisan hands.  In Indiana, where Eric Holcomb was the Republicans’ replacement to run for governor instead of Mike Pence, Mr. Holcomb was elected on Tuesday, overcoming his late arrival to the race, his relative obscurity statewide and a significant challenge from a Democrat.  A victory for Mr. Holcomb helps seal Republicans’ continued control of Indianapolis, where in recent years the state’s political leaders have approved a series of conservative measures, including provisions that restricted abortion and lessened union power.  Mr. Holcomb, a former state party chairman who had been appointed Indiana’s lieutenant governor only this year, defeated John Gregg, a Democrat who struck a conciliatory tone on Tuesday night. “So much is divided in our nation and divided in our state,” Mr. Gregg told a crowd of Democrats who gathered in downtown Indianapolis and saw one candidate after another lose. Mr. Gregg urged his supporters to make Tuesday’s defeat “a point where the healing begins, where we all move closer together, where we begin to move forward as one.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Democrats held on to at least one governor’s seat that had been seen as up for grabs. West Virginia voters, looking past their state’s diminished economy and their gradual embrace of the Republican Party, elected a Democrat, Jim Justice, as governor on Tuesday. Democrats have remained in the governor’s mansion since 2001.  Mr. Justice, a mining executive and the owner of the Greenbrier resort, defeated Bill Cole, the president of the State Senate. He will inherit a state with a 5.8 percent unemployment rate, one of the country’s highest.  President Obama, who has seen 800 Democratic state lawmakers voted out during his time in office, stepped in this time with his largest effort yet to help local Democrats, directly assisting more than 150 state legislative candidates. Democratic leaders were hopeful that a strong showing at the presidential level might translate into gains all the way down the ballot, even in state congressional races. But Democrats had a steep climb given Republican successes in recent years.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  From 2010 on, Republicans have swept into statehouses across the nation. By this year, Republicans effectively controlled 68 state legislative chambers — more than the party has ever held. By Election Day, the Republicans held 31 of 50 governorships, and full dominance over chambers as well as governor’s offices in at least 22 state capitals. Before 2010, they had full control of only nine state capitals and 36 legislative chambers.  The fate of the statehouses has huge stakes because so much has taken place in them in recent years. The dominance of Republicans has freed many states to take a significant turn to the right on several issues, even as a divided federal government in Washington finds itself gnarled in gridlock. Republican-led states passed hundreds of laws restricting abortion, while others worked to tighten voter identification laws. Republicans have also controlled the redrawing of political maps in some states, making it more difficult for Democrats to win elections.  In North Dakota, voters opted to continue the state’s streak of Republican governors, electing Doug Burgum to succeed Gov. Jack Dalrymple, who did not seek another term. Republicans have controlled the governor’s office in North Dakota since 1992.  In Utah, voters backed a second full term for Gov. Gary R. Herbert, a Republican who became the state’s top elected official after the resignation of Jon Huntsman. Mr. Herbert’s victory was never in much doubt in Utah, a reliably conservative state where he won 68 percent of the vote four years ago.  In Democratic-leaning Delaware, John Carney, a Democratic member of the United States House, won the race for governor, as was widely expected there.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington, a Democrat, was elected to a second term, defeating Bill Bryant four years after he edged into power.  And in Oregon, Gov. Kate Brown won a special election and will finish a term that will end in 2019. Ms. Brown, a Democrat, became governor last year after an ethics scandal prompted the resignation of Gov. John Kitzhaber, a Democrat. Ms. Brown easily defeated four other candidates, including Bud Pierce, the Republican nominee.  But the state legislative contests had potential to have a still wider effect on policy across the country. At least 20 chambers were seen as highly competitive in the election, and a majority of those are now controlled by Republicans.  Republicans hoped to hold control and extend their reach in places like Iowa, where they succeeded in taking over the state Senate on Tuesday. They also seized control of Kentucky’s House of Representatives, which Democrats have held since 1922. The chamber was the last in the South that Democrats led, and it had been a firewall for the party in Kentucky, where Republicans have won significant victories in recent years.
Photo  Voters nationwide endured long waits in line, malfunctioning voting machines, ill-informed poll workers and a litany of lesser annoyances on Tuesday with scattered reports that some voters gave up trying to cast ballots.  There were claims of illegal electioneering and intimidation by partisans on both sides, but the fears of widespread chaos at polling places, and even violence, failed to materialize as polls began to close on the East Coast.  Nor did there appear to be any organized effort to disrupt the vote, either by supporters of the candidates or by hackers seeking to break into voting or registration databases.  “It’s pretty much what we’d expect to see,” David Becker, the executive director of the Center for Election Innovation and Research, said at midday in New York. “There are scattered indications of machine breakdowns that are being addressed.”  Mr. Becker was among the experts on hand at the New York headquarters of Electionland, a joint journalism project by the nonprofit group ProPublica that was tracking voting problems by monitoring social media, calls to election hotlines and reports from 400 participating news organizations.  The most consequential breakdown may have occurred in Durham, N.C., a Democratic stronghold in one of the most hotly contested states, where the State Board of Elections agreed to keep eight voting sites, which were scheduled to close at 7:30 p.m., open as late as 9 p.m.  A computerized system was supposed to allow Durham County poll workers to quickly verify a voter’s registration and print out a voter authorization slip.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the system failed in some precincts, and poll workers reverted to the much slower practice of looking up each voter in a physical book, and filling out each slip by hand.  One voting precinct ran out of slips and closed for about an hour and a half, turning voters away, county officials said, and civil rights groups said that at least one other precinct had similar trouble. And in other places, the malfunction caused extremely long lines.  At North Carolina Central University, a historically black university in Durham, “it was a two-and-one-half-hour wait at 3 p.m.,” said Gunther Peck, a Duke University associate professor of history who was an organizer for President Obama’s two elections.  “Only 240 people had voted as of 4 p.m., and it should have been 500,” he added. “Dozens of students had to leave. It was good for Donald Trump, no doubt about that.”  Photo  The Rev. William J. Barber II, president of the North Carolina N.A.A.C.P., appealed to voters to stay in lines, no matter how long. “The battle you need to fight is the battle not to get discouraged,” he said.  Experts had expressed concern about intimidation at the polls in the wake of repeated insistence by the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, that the election was rigged, and his request for supporters to monitor the polls for fraud.  Groups ranging from Republican loyalists to white nationalists and extremist militia had promised to answer his call.  Election Protection, a coalition of groups operating a voter hotline, said it had fielded more than 30,000 complaints by early evening in the East, disproportionately affecting minority voters and students.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They had been directed to the wrong polling places, learned that their names had been purged from voter rolls, were wrongly told they had to fill out provisional ballots, were improperly asked for identification or had to wait in very long lines.  It cited problems in several states, notably closely contested ones like Arizona, Florida, North Carolina and Ohio.  Photo  Texans reported a range of electoral problems, from the mundane to the bizarre.  In Harris County, which includes Houston, incorrect instructions on official websites directed voters to polling places that had been moved elsewhere, said Anthony Gutierrez, the state executive director for Common Cause.  In Dallas County, one polling place remained shuttered for about two hours after it was scheduled to open, Mr. Gutierrez said, because the election worker who was responsible for opening it had died the previous night.  Voters from New Hampshire to Virginia to Missouri were complaining about long lines at their polling places.  At Glen Allen Elementary School in Henrico County, Va., waiting voters formed a large semicircle outside the school, though there were no malfunctions there.  “A friend of mine texted around 9 a.m. to say voting was taking one hour and 45 minutes,” said Daryl Watkins, a local resident. “Never before has it been that busy at a polling station.”  Tram Nguyen, a co-executive director of the New Virginia Majority, a voting advocacy group, said there were problems, but “nothing to levels that we would find alarming.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  A few partisans were nevertheless alarmed.  The conservative activist James O’Keefe, whose Project Veritas is known for undercover videos purporting to expose liberal corruption, sent followers an email titled “It’s worse than we thought.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In it, he wrote, “Every staffer in our office is completely overwhelmed with reports of voter irregularity,” including “reports of busses crossing Mexican border in California going directly to polling places.”  A spokesman for the California secretary of state, which oversees election matters, said the office had received no reports of that nature.  And in Pittsburgh, an election judge summoned police officers to eject AmyJo Brown from a polling place after she refused the judge’s demand to produce an ID before voting.  Pennsylvania law requires first-time voters to produce identification before casting ballots, but Ms. Brown, 37, the founder of a media start-up, said she was a regular voter.  Ms. Brown said she had called local election officials, who came to the polling place to set the judge straight.  “When I went back in, they didn’t say a word to me.” she said. “They were muttering under their breath, but within my hearing, about my attitude. But I did get to vote.”
Photo  SAN FRANCISCO — California, Massachusetts and Nevada legalized marijuana on Tuesday in what advocates said was a reflection of the country’s changing attitude toward the drug.  Leading up to the election, recreational marijuana use was legal in four states: Alaska, Colorado, Oregon and Washington, along with Washington, D.C.  With the addition of California, Massachusetts and Nevada, the percentage of Americans living in states where marijuana use is legal for adults rose above 20 percent, from 5 percent.  Representative Earl Blumenauer, Democrat of Oregon and a supporter of legalization, said Tuesday’s votes would add to the pressure on the federal government to treat cannabis like alcohol, allowing each state to decide on its own regulations.  “The new administration is not going to want to continue this toxic and nonproductive war on drugs,” Mr. Blumenauer said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The federal government’s ban on the drug precludes the interstate sale of cannabis, even among the states that have approved its use. But Tuesday’s votes created a marijuana bloc stretching down the West Coast, and Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor of California, said he saw an opportunity for the states where recreational marijuana is now legal to “coordinate and collaborate” on the issue, including applying pressure in Washington to relax the federal ban.  A Gallup poll in October found nationwide support for legalization at 60 percent, the highest level in the 47 years the organization has tracked the issue.  Support is rising even though some public health experts warn that there have been insufficient studies of the drug’s effects and that law enforcement agencies lack reliable tests and protocols to determine whether a driver is impaired by marijuana.  Supporters in California portrayed legalization as both a social justice and a criminal justice issue, saying the measure would help redress the disproportionate numbers of arrests and convictions among minorities for drug crimes.  “I think of this victory in California as a major victory,” said Lauren Mendelsohn, the chairwoman of the board of directors of Students for Sensible Drug Policy, a group that has campaigned against the government’s war on drugs. “It shows the whole country that prohibition is not the answer to the marijuana question.”  Ms. Mendelsohn spoke at a celebration in Oakland for the passage of Proposition 64, as California’s legalization measure was known.  Supporters of legalization in California vastly outspent opponents.  As of Nov. 6, pro-legalization committees in the state had raised around $23 million, according to the California secretary of state’s office. Chief among the backers were marijuana companies and tech entrepreneurs, including Sean Parker, a founder of the file-sharing service Napster and a former president of Facebook, who was the single largest donor to the campaign. The anti-legalization campaign had spent less than $2 million in California.  Kevin Sabet, the president of Smart Approaches to Marijuana, one of the country’s major funders against marijuana legalization initiatives, attributed the imbalance in campaign spending to investments by marijuana companies hoping to profit if the industry was legalized.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “There’s a lot of money to be made if marijuana is legal, not a lot of money to be made if it remains illegal,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Opponents of legalization say the adoption of medical marijuana laws in more than 25 states has led to a popular perception that cannabis is good for you. They have called for more studies on the drug’s long-term effects, particularly on the developing brains of young people.  “There is likely medical promise in the marijuana plant, but that is different than saying smoked marijuana is medicine,” Mr. Sabet said. “We wouldn’t smoke the opium plant to get the beneficial effects of morphine.”  A bill to legalize marijuana in Vermont, supported by Gov. Peter Shumlin, a Democrat, failed earlier this year. But in Massachusetts, public support for legalization rose during the fall, even with bipartisan opposition from the state’s top elected officials — including Gov. Charlie Baker, a Republican, and Attorney General Maura Healey, a Democrat — and an organized anti-legalization campaign.  Lawmakers in Rhode Island were watching Massachusetts closely, and they are expected to take up a legalization measure of their own now that one has passed there.  Two other states — Arizona and Maine — were voting on recreational marijuana legalization Tuesday. Arizona voted against the measure. In Maine, a state with a libertarian streak that began decriminalizing marijuana decades ago, the referendum on legalization drew scant funded opposition.  Still, proponents of legalization said California would represent the biggest victory because of its huge economy and population and also its fertile soil and amenable climate.  Tuesday’s vote reinforced the state’s position as the epicenter of marijuana cultivation for the country, a role it has had illicitly for decades. Marijuana companies have been positioning themselves for the prospect of interstate commerce, buying large plots of land in areas that now grow vegetables and other crops.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The California measure, which passed with 56 percent approval, allows people over 21 to possess limited amounts of marijuana for personal use and also permits the personal cultivation of up to six plants in private residences, provided they are shielded from public view. The sale of recreational marijuana will not be allowed until licenses are issued, a process that will take at least two years, said Steve DeAngelo, the founder of Harborside, a medical marijuana dispensary in Oakland.  California officials expect additional tax revenue of around $1 billion from marijuana sales. The revenue is earmarked for the study of medical marijuana, for the California Highway Patrol to develop procedures to determine driver impairment due to marijuana consumption, for youth education on drugs, and for the prevention of environmental damage from marijuana production, among other programs.  Support for legalization in California cut across all age groups except voters over 65, according to a Field poll released on Friday. Among those older voters, 42 percent were in favor, and 57 percent were against.  A large majority of Republicans in the poll, 65 percent, were against the measure, compared with 72 percent support among Democrats.  Support has been rising steadily since the 1960s, when only around 10 percent of California adults favored legalization, according to a 1969 Field poll, and legalization was the culmination of decades of campaigning by proponents. A measure to decriminalize marijuana in 1972 was soundly rejected in California, with 66.5 percent of voters opposed to it. In 1996, California voted to allow medical marijuana. But a 2010 measure to permit recreational use failed.  In addition to Tuesday’s votes on recreational marijuana, Arkansas, Florida, Montana and North Dakota had medical marijuana initiatives on the ballot. All four passed the legislation.
Mrs. Clinton, in her first remarks to supporters after the election, said Americans owed Mr. Trump “an open mind and a chance to lead.” Choking back tears at times, she said she was “sorry that we did not win this election for the values we share and the vision we hold for our country.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This is painful, and it will be for a long time,” Mrs. Clinton said, standing beside her husband, former President Bill Clinton, in a tableau that underscored the end of a nearly 25-year era in which the Clintons dominated American politics.  The clash between excitement and dread was especially palpable over the likelihood that Mr. Trump, at the head of a unified Republican government, would try to reverse Obama administration policies and appoint a conservative Supreme Court justice. The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, indicated on Wednesday that Republicans would try to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and Democrats privately began strategizing to thwart that agenda. Republicans also expanded their power in state capitals, and Democrats pledged resistance.  Foreign leaders who have had tense relations with Mr. Obama were particularly welcoming to Mr. Trump. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel called Mr. Trump “a true friend” of Israel, while President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said he hoped to have a “constructive dialogue” with him. Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin had previously exchanged warm words, to the consternation of both Democratic and Republican leaders, but Trump advisers said on Wednesday that the two leaders had not spoken by phone yet.  Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, whose immigration policies Mr. Trump has dismissed as “insane,” offered her cooperation but emphasized the importance of human rights, while President François Hollande of France noted that some of Mr. Trump’s views might test “the values and the interests that we share with the United States.” Mexican officials congratulated Mr. Trump but said they would not pay for his proposed border wall, as he has flatly insisted they will.  Mr. Trump’s campaign advisers said on Wednesday that he had been fielding calls from politicians like Mr. Ryan and world leaders, while also assembling a cabinet and White House team and selecting a conservative nominee for the Supreme Court vacancy. They said Mr. Trump was inclined to roll out a few cabinet nominations at a time, rather than kicking them off with one high-profile pick for a critical department like Treasury or State.  Among the candidates for cabinet secretaries and advisers are members of Mr. Trump’s inner circle, aides said, including Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a crucial adviser on policy issues; Steven Mnuchin, a businessman who was Mr. Trump’s national finance chairman; Rudolph W. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York; Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey; and Newt Gingrich, a former speaker of the House.  Advisers said Mr. Trump had also started thinking about ways to unite the country. Democratic leaders quickly embraced a policy priority that he highlighted in his victory speech: infrastructure spending.  Still, more than a third of Americans said in exit polls on Tuesday that they would be frightened of a Trump presidency. Among those who voted for Mrs. Clinton, the feeling was almost unanimous: 92 percent said Mr. Trump scared them.  How Will a Trump Presidency Affect Your Country? We want to hear from readers outside the United States on the election of Donald J. Trump. We may publish a selection of the responses. Queremos saber qué opinan nuestros lectores afuera de Estados Unidos tras la elección de Donald Trump como presidente de Estados Unidos. Algunas de estas respuestas podrían ser publicadas. Required fields are marked with an asterisk. How do you think a Trump presidency will affect you and your family? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump te afectará a ti y a tu familia? Continue How do you think a Trump presidency will affect your country? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump afectará a tu país? If you had a meeting with the president-elect, what is one thing you would tell him about your life and your country that could inform his foreign policy? Si te pudieras reunir con el presidente electo, ¿qué le contarías sobre tu vida y tu país para informar sus decisiones de política exterior? Continue What is your name? * ¿Cómo te llamas? Where are you from? * ¿De dónde eres? What is your phone number? ¿Cuál es tu teléfono? By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service. Thank you for your submission.  Anxieties ran strong among Hispanics, African-Americans, Muslims, immigrants, women and others who had felt disparaged or demonized by Mr. Trump, who used harsh and racially charged language in ways that upended mainstream politics. The fact that Mr. Trump had been endorsed by a Ku Klux Klan newspaper, even if he rejected it, symbolized the sense of shock that he would now lead a vibrantly diverse democracy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Alma Guel, 59, of El Paso, let out a long sigh as she started talking through the levels of emotional distress she had felt over the last 24 hours. She felt outrage, disbelief, then suspicion that the outcome was legitimate, then ashamed. She even started looking at property to buy in Mexico. Eventually, she just felt crushed.  “I was just heartbroken,” said Ms. Guel, who works in the safety department of her local electric company. “And all day today, I’ve been in a daze. I’ve never, ever been this affected by any other election.”  Many conservatives felt just as strongly — but in the opposite direction. The conservative radio host Laura Ingraham was overcome with emotion on her show Wednesday. “You’re bringing tears to my eyes,” she told the Republican strategist Ed Rollins as she beamed over the meaning of Mr. Trump’s win.  Jacob Stout, 20, who owns a small contracting business in Danville, Ky., said the result thrilled him because of the promise of bold action in Washington. “I’m excited, man. I’m not going to lie,” he said. “We’ve seen, especially the last eight years, talk but not drastic change that benefits the citizens. The idea that a citizen would be taking the presidency as opposed to a politician, I think that’s got people excited.”  Photo  His wife, Chloe Joslin, 24, was more tempered in her expectations, even though she also voted for Mr. Trump.  “Oh, my goodness, you see people who are disowning friends over who they are voting for,” said Ms. Joslin, a communications instructor. “It’s been a very heated race.”  Politicians also joined business leaders, as well as the many Americans with retirement and savings accounts, in keeping a nervous eye on the world financial markets, fearing the sort of backlash that wounded Britain after its vote in June to leave the European Union. While some business leaders worried that the nation would slide into recession, others were hopeful that Mr. Trump’s proposals of tax cuts, infrastructure spending and relaxed regulations would be welcomed by the markets, which reversed sharp declines overnight.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Political activity and reactions in both parties were in a surreal state of suspended animation as Republicans and Democrats began anticipating Mr. Trump’s moves. Mr. Ryan said at a news conference Wednesday that Mr. Trump had a “mandate” for his vision of government, but was sparing on the details of how they would work together. Mr. Ryan stopped campaigning for him last month after revelations that Mr. Trump had boasted about sexual assault.  Mr. Ryan said that he had “spoken with Donald twice in the last 18 hours.”  “We talked about the work ahead of us, and the importance of bringing the nation together,” he said. “This needs to be a time of redemption, not a time of recrimination.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Ryan could have been hinting at his own fate. There are more than a few restless conservatives in his conference in the House who were agitating for his ouster before the election because of his failure to fully embrace Mr. Trump. And whether that discontent will die down is far from clear.  Other Republicans who made their reservations about Mr. Trump proudly known before the election tried to be gracious, though some sounded more skeptical than optimistic.  Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who became a public face of the anti-Trump faction on Capitol Hill, said he and his family had asked God to steer Mr. Trump in the right direction. “We pray that he will lead wisely and faithfully keep his oath to a Constitution of limited government,” Mr. Sasse said in a statement.  Then he promised to hold Mr. Trump to his word. “Starting today, I will do everything in my power to hold the president to his promises,” he said.  Elsewhere, the transition of power seemed to be unfolding in an orderly fashion. Word came from the Pentagon on Wednesday morning that Mr. Trump would begin receiving the same classified intelligence briefings as the president. And the defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter, said in a statement that he was committed to a smooth passing of power to the next commander in chief.
Mr. Trump spoke to their aspirations and fears more directly than any Republican candidate in decades, attacking illegal immigrants and Muslims and promising early Wednesday to return “the forgotten men and women of our country” to the symbolic and political forefront of American life. He electrified the country’s white majority and mustered its full strength against long-term demographic decay.  “A lot of stuff he’s talking about is just God-given common sense, which I think both parties have lost,” said Tom Kirkpatrick, 51, a Trump supporter who used to work in an industrial laundry plant and is now on disability. He stood near the Florida State Capitol on Tuesday, holding an American flag. “Let’s put him in. And if he doesn’t do what he says, I’ll help you vote him out.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump also won over millions of voters who had once flocked to President Obama’s promise of hope and change, and who on Tuesday saw in Mr. Trump their best chance to dampen the most painful blows of globalization and trade, to fight special interests, and to be heard and protected. Twelve percent of Mr. Trump’s supporters approved of Mr. Obama, according to the exit polls.  Mrs. Clinton won by a greater margin than Mr. Obama among affluent whites, particularly those living in the Democratic Party’s prosperous coastal strongholds: Washington and Boston, Seattle and New York. In Manhattan, where Mr. Trump lives and works — and where his fellow citizens mocked and jeered him as he voted on Tuesday — Mrs. Clinton won by a record margin, amassing 87 percent of the vote to Mr. Trump’s 10 percent. Around the country, she won a majority of voters over all, harvesting the country’s growing and densely packed big cities and a plurality of the suburbs.  But Mr. Trump won low-income white voters to the Republican ticket, reversing a partisan divide along class lines that is as old as the Democratic and Republican Parties — a replay of the “Brexit” vote in June, when the old bastions of England’s Labor-left voted decisively to leave the European Union. His breakthrough among white working-class voters in the North not only erased the Democratic advantage but reversed it, giving him a victory in the Electoral College while he lost the national popular vote.  Most strikingly, Mr. Trump won his biggest margins among middle-income white voters, according to exit polls, a revolt not only of the white working class but of the country’s vast white middle class. He did better than past Republicans in the sprawling suburbs along Florida’s central coasts, overwhelming Mrs. Clinton’s gains among Hispanic voters. He held down Mrs. Clinton’s margins in the Philadelphia suburbs, defying expectations that Mrs. Clinton would outperform Mr. Obama by a wide margin.  Magnified by the constitutional design of the Electoral College, and aided by Republican-led efforts to dampen black and Latino voting in states like North Carolina, Mr. Trump’s America proved the larger on Election Day. It smashed through the Democrats’ supposed electoral “blue wall” — the 18 states carried by Democrats in every election since 1992, such as Michigan and Pennsylvania, plus the diverse and well-educated parts of the country that Mr. Obama attracted in his two races, like New Mexico, Nevada, Virginia and Colorado.  Starting Wednesday, you could walk from the Vermont border through Appalachian coal country to the outskirts of St. Louis without crossing a county Mr. Trump did not win decisively. You could head south through rural and suburban Georgia all the way to South Florida, or northwest through the Upper Midwest, or make a beeline for the West Coast, skirting only the rising Democratic communities of Colorado and the booming multicultural sprawl of Las Vegas before finally reaching Mrs. Clinton’s part of the country.  “It’s not that he was the most polished of politicians,” said Justin Channell, 36, of Brewer, Me., who works at a health insurance company. “I liked the message of the anti-establishment, that corruption in D.C. is so prevalent.”  Mrs. Clinton won the America of big, racially diverse cities and centers of the new economy, from Silicon Valley to the Silicon Slopes of Utah, where many traditionally Republican voters rejected Mr. Trump. But lining up for Mr. Trump was a parallel urban America of smaller cities — places like Scranton, Pa.; Youngstown, Ohio; and Dubuque, Iowa — that boomed during the industrial era, and are still connected by the arteries of the old American economy.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  She had hoped for a surge of voting by Latinos, immigrants and African-Americans, a manifestation of the rising American electorate long predicted by liberal strategists and feared by the Republican elite in Washington. But exit polls suggest that Mr. Trump — despite his attacks on immigrants, Muslims and Mexicans, and his clumsy invocation of black neighborhoods mired in chaos and decay — did not fare worse among the African-American and Latino voters who showed up to the polls than Mitt Romney did four years ago.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Miami-Dade County, where Mr. Trump had more room to lose ground among Hispanic voters than anywhere else in the country, Mrs. Clinton inched up to only 64 percent from Mr. Obama’s 62 percent of the Hispanic vote. Turnout dropped considerably in black communities across the country, from the rural South to Cleveland, Milwaukee and Detroit.  By Wednesday, the notion of a Democratic electoral map advantage bolstered by rising Hispanic power seemed distant. Even if Mrs. Clinton had won Florida, Mr. Trump would have powered to victory through the new Republican heartland, in states like Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Michigan, where Hispanic voters represent just a fraction of the electorate.  Nor was the growing Hispanic vote — and Mrs. Clinton’s strength among well-educated voters — enough to pull her especially close in either Arizona or Texas, the only two heavily Hispanic states that could have plausibly joined Florida to put her over the top.  Even where Democratic-leaning Hispanics are growing as a force, Mr. Trump’s supporters were waiting on Tuesday.  Anthony Brdar, 42, stood in front of his West Miami polling station, holding a handmade “Vote Trump” sign, and waved a T-shirt of Mr. Obama’s face made to look like the Joker. It called him a tyrant. An out-of-work lawyer who lives in a heavily Hispanic neighborhood in Miami, Mr. Brdar said he had never felt so compelled to vote.  “I feel our country is on the verge of becoming a third world country,” he said. “Our children are not going to have a future. We are not going to have a future.”
It is a line he often repeated in his unlikely candidacy. America’s Asian allies, South Korea included, are about to learn whether that is an opening negotiating position, or the condition for America’s continued military presence in the Pacific. Japan’s best hope arises from the fact that he is now focusing his attentions on the United States’ five-times-as-large trade deficit with China, which he described in May as engaged in “the greatest theft in the history of the world.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At home, his instincts often mix elements of what he has heard or read from the left and the right. His economic policy might best be described as “Big Government Conservatism,” a mix of major tax cuts, mostly for businesses, and a massive infrastructure program to rebuild the dank airports and collapsing bridges that he used in the campaign as a symbol of America’s declining status. It is a subject he comes to easily as a developer who wanted to get customers to his properties.  So far, those proposals do not add up to a coherent strategy. The tax cuts come right out of the Republican playbook; the spending right out of the Democrats’ agenda of spurring the economy with government-led job creation. His commitment to preserve social programs is far more Obama than Reagan. His vow to rip apart the Affordable Care Act, the symbolic domestic achievement of the Obama presidency, adopts the favorite cause of the Republican leadership with whom he has often clashed.  Photo  Experts who have looked at his proposals — many so vague they cannot be “priced” — have concluded that federal deficits will soar. And that gets to Mr. Trump’s willingness to entertain two completely contradictory thoughts at once, because rarely did he finish an interview or a debate without reminding listeners that a federal debt heading toward $20 trillion was a “disaster” that only he could fix. In his first year, he will have to square those two promises — or not.  Indeed, his campaign talk has often contradicted his past proposals. In the early 1990s, for example, Mr. Trump lobbied Congress to raise income taxes on the wealthy to encourage investment in real estate, while advocating the restoration of tax breaks for real estate investments.  In 1999, Mr. Trump proposed a “net worth tax” on the wealthy to pay off the national debt. “Personally this plan would cost me hundreds of millions of dollars, but in all honesty, it’s worth it,” Mr. Trump said at the time. His motivation: He was considering a bid for the presidential nomination of Ross Perot’s Reform Party, which had made federal debt reduction one of its signature issues.  But it is in national security that he faces some of the biggest quandaries.  His zero-sum instincts kick in when the subject turns to immigration, which is essentially the importation of people. He has long argued that immigrants take jobs from Americans, diminishing prosperity by dividing the American pie into a larger number of smaller pieces. The idea that they can bolster the economy, too — as some of the founders of Intel, Google and other Silicon Valley powerhouses did — never creeps into his speeches.  Mr. Trump’s views of the economy are also deeply rooted in his identity as a real estate developer. He regularly emphasizes the economic importance of making things, while rarely mentioning the service work that employs most Americans. He has repeatedly promised to revive the steel production, a line of work that now employs about as many people as a large medical center.  In fact, it is the era when America was making steel that Mr. Trump harks back to when he talks about the era when America was at the peak of its power. He noted in a March interview that in the late 1940s and early 1950s, “we were not pushed around, we were respected by everybody, we had just won a war.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It is a view of American power that spills over into his approach to national security. He sees little long-term benefit from funding efforts to eliminate the root causes of terrorism. His mind goes to military solutions first. Few statements were more often repeated, or more heartfelt, than his vow to bomb the Islamic State, and “take the oil.”  How Will a Trump Presidency Affect Your Country? We want to hear from readers outside the United States on the election of Donald J. Trump. We may publish a selection of the responses. Queremos saber qué opinan nuestros lectores afuera de Estados Unidos tras la elección de Donald Trump como presidente de Estados Unidos. Algunas de estas respuestas podrían ser publicadas. Required fields are marked with an asterisk. How do you think a Trump presidency will affect you and your family? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump te afectará a ti y a tu familia? Continue How do you think a Trump presidency will affect your country? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump afectará a tu país? If you had a meeting with the president-elect, what is one thing you would tell him about your life and your country that could inform his foreign policy? Si te pudieras reunir con el presidente electo, ¿qué le contarías sobre tu vida y tu país para informar sus decisiones de política exterior? Continue What is your name? * ¿Cómo te llamas? Where are you from? * ¿De dónde eres? What is your phone number? ¿Cuál es tu teléfono? By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service. Thank you for your submission.  Those lines always brought his crowds to their feet. Now comes the far more complex part: He is about to inherit the problem of how to hold and redevelop Mosul once the Islamic State forces are ousted — under a military plan that he has dismissed as ineffective — and how to “take the oil” of a sovereign state, Iraq. And he must do so without returning to an era of constant American combat presence that had made embers of his own war-weary party, and Hillary Clinton, blanch.  And no relationship will be under more scrutiny than how Mr. Trump handles President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, whom he has repeatedly praised in terms that shocked his own party, and his running mate.  The Cold War was the ultimate geopolitical zero-sum game. For most Republicans, it still is: Twenty-five years after the collapse of the Soviet Union, there is a growing bipartisan consensus in the foreign policy and intelligence leadership that Russia must be both constrained and contained, its harassment of the new members of NATO halted, its cyberattacks deterred.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump is an outlier to that view, and never once backed the idea of “containment.” He repeatedly made the case that he, and he alone, could negotiate with authoritarians like Mr. Putin.  Would he lift the sanctions over Russia’s annexation of Crimea — a move that Mr. Trump has seemed to suggest was justified — and its harassment of Ukraine? Would he back off from the Obama administration’s decision to bolster the American military presence off Russia’s borders?  “My administration,” he said recently, “will work with any country that is willing to partner with us to defeat ISIS, and halt radical Islamic terrorism. And that includes Russia.” On Wednesday, Mr. Putin seemed to return that sentiment, sensing his opportunity and saying he looked forward to restoring “fully fledged” relations with the United States.  “If they want to join us by knocking out ISIS, that is just fine as far as I’m concerned,” Mr. Trump said recently, in a statement that oozed Kissingerian realpolitik. “It is a very imperfect world, and you can’t always choose your friends. But you can never fail to recognize your enemies.”  Such issues will stretch Mr. Trump in new directions. His experience in the business world did little to hone his thinking how to prioritize American national interests: When asked about it in March, he said that “protection of our country” was No. 1, but he struggled to explain others, including when he thought American troops should be put at risk in defense of a humanitarian cause. With nearly 500,000 people dead in Syria, that issue will be on his desk on the afternoon of Jan. 20, along with many others.
Mr. Yarmuth said the party would have been better off nominating Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who declined to mount a presidential campaign as Democratic leaders rallied around the former first lady.  Photo  “I don’t think there’s any question about that,” Mr. Yarmuth said, adding, “I spend a lot of time around union guys. And the union leadership has been saying all along to me: Their members just don’t trust Democrats anymore.”  Harold A. Schaitberger, the president of the International Association of Fire Fighters, said Mr. Biden would have helped Democrats reach Midwestern working-class voters disillusioned by the country’s politics.  “I think that the vice president would have been able to message along those lines,” said Mr. Schaitberger, who tried to convince Mr. Biden to run last year.  As much as anything, Mrs. Clinton’s defeat laid bare the Democratic Party’s thin bench as it heads into at least two years in the minority in Congress.  Her primary rival, Senator Bernie Sanders, is 75; Mr. Biden is 73; and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who declined to run for president with Mrs. Clinton in the race, is 67. A win by Mrs. Clinton would have applied a thin coat of paint to conceal the party’s fundamental weaknesses, perhaps allowing younger leaders like California’s newly elected senator, Kamala Harris, time to develop into national figures.  “We don’t know who will emerge as a leader,” said Matt Bennett, the president of Third Way, a centrist Democratic organization. “Chuck Schumer will probably emerge as a congressional leader. Nationally, it’s going to take some time for a leader to emerge.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Bennett said he believed Mrs. Clinton was the best choice for the Democrats this year.  “There wasn’t anyone who was going to push her off the stage after she paid her dues and did her time and got close in ’08,” he said. “She was the secretary of state and had Obama’s backing. She was as much an anointed candidate as a vice president would have been.”  Photo  But other Democrats said that Mrs. Clinton’s flaws were well known and that her defeat should not have come as a surprise.  Representative Debbie Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, said she told former President Bill Clinton during a visit to an African-American church in Detroit last week that Mrs. Clinton was in trouble in the state, which Democrats had thought was locked down.  “I told Bill they needed to energize Detroit, that we have a millennial problem, that the union guys are gone and that Macomb is gone,” Ms. Dingell said, referring to the blue-collar suburban Detroit County often described as the epicenter of Reagan Democrats. Mr. Trump carried Macomb County by more than 11 percentage points on the way to what appeared to be a narrow victory in the state.  As it was, Mrs. Clinton had a serious obstacle in trying to overcome one of the most powerful forces in American politics — the hunger for change that is cyclically embraced by voters — while being such a well-known figure and running for what was in effect a third term for President Obama.  “You can look at the fact that for the entire election cycle, you had a change electorate, where 60 percent of the people felt the country was going in the wrong direction,” said Anita Dunn, who served as Mr. Obama’s communications director.  Tad Devine, a senior adviser to Mr. Sanders, said Mrs. Clinton’s shortcomings had become apparent in the primary race as she struggled with Mr. Sanders in states like Michigan and Wisconsin, which she lost.  “The conventional political wisdom of insider Washington thought it knew better than the voters who still get to decide elections in America,” he said. “And it paved the way for a nominee who failed to do the one thing that a winning candidate must do — make their campaign about the future.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was secretary of state, which became one of her biggest problems this year, did not become known until after she had entered the race. But her weaknesses as a candidate were on display when she ran for senator from New York in 2000 and for president in 2008 against Mr. Obama.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  She is not a particularly strong public presence. She and her husband have endured a run of investigations. Her campaigns have historically struggled to define a message, which was particularly glaring as Mr. Trump traveled the nation, vowing to “Make America Great Again.” And her history of centrist positions on issues like trade and foreign policy became increasingly problematic as the party drifted to the left.  “We’ve been saying this for 30 years and too many people in the leadership of the Democratic Party didn’t listen,” said Leo W. Gerard, the president of the United Steelworkers.  Still, the Democratic presidential field was largely cleared for Mrs. Clinton’s candidacy almost from the moment she left the State Department in early 2013. Prominent Democrats who considered running — including senators Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota — held back, awaiting Mrs. Clinton’s final decision. The only Democrat who ran against her was Martin O’Malley, the outgoing governor of Maryland.  Bill Richardson, the Democratic former governor of New Mexico, said Tuesday’s vote was more than anything a “pro-Trump, anti-establishment punch.” But he said Democrats had their work cut out for them as they tried to rebuild.  “Democrats should develop a more progressive agenda, à la Sanders, particularly on income inequality issues,” he said, adding that the “2020 field should be wide open and Democrats should develop a wider bench of younger candidates.”  But Mr. Richardson, who worked in the Clinton White House — but went on to endorse Mr. Obama against Mrs. Clinton in 2008 — also said that her time in Democratic politics had not ended with her loss. “Hillary should play a major role in reshaping the party,” he said.
He said he would quickly cancel a program Mr. Obama put in place by executive action that gave protection from deportation and work permits to about 800,000 undocumented immigrants who came to the United States as children. They will lose jobs and scholarships that allowed many to attend college and start careers, and they will become vulnerable to deportation. Mr. Trump would also permanently cancel a broader protection program for undocumented immigrants that Mr. Obama tried to carry out that was blocked by the courts.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has said he will initiate a campaign to deport, within the first year of his presidency, what he described as up to two million undocumented immigrants with criminal records, although he has not explained how he reached that estimate. Enforcement operations would ramp up, with widespread raids in communities and workplaces.  Mr. Trump is also likely to expand detention centers along the border for illegal crossers, ending the Obama administration’s practice of releasing many families who have come fleeing violence in Central America so they can seek asylum in immigration courts. Mr. Trump has said he will punish so-called sanctuary cities, which have curbed their cooperation with the immigration authorities, by withholding federal funding.  Photo  He has also said he will temporarily halt all Syrian refugees coming to the United States. He has pledged “extreme vetting” for other refugees, including an “ideological certification” by which they would have to show they share American values. He said he would halt immigration from regions of the world that are “compromised by terrorism,” although he has not specified what countries he means.  And he has said he will tighten scrutiny throughout the immigration system, including on foreigners who come to work or to reunite with their families. Although the system already has crippling backlogs, Mr. Trump wants to further reduce legal immigration from its current levels — but he would need the approval of Congress for that.  — JULIA PRESTON  _____  Climate Change  The shift in Washington comes just as the United States has been assuming a leadership role in combating climate change, and it will almost certainly upend the world’s efforts to curb the impact of global warming.  Mr. Trump has repeatedly denied the science of human-caused climate change, incorrectly calling it “fictional” and saying it was a hoax created by the Chinese. He has said that he will do everything in his power to undo Mr. Obama’s ambitious domestic and international climate change policies.  While some legal and procedural roadblocks would impede a complete gutting of Mr. Obama’s existing climate change regulations, Mr. Trump could significantly weaken or slow them. And in sending a message to the rest of the world that the United States does not intend to enact a climate change agenda, the Trump presidency could cause reluctant governments such as those in India and Poland to slow or weaken their efforts to cut planet-warming emissions.  Mr. Trump has vowed to “cancel” the Paris Agreement, the 2015 deal in which nearly every country put forth plans to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide. In fact, it is not possible for a world leader to unilaterally block or undo the accord, nor would it be possible for the United States to legally withdraw from it for at least the first term of a Trump administration. That is because with Mr. Obama and the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, urging other countries to ratify the accord rapidly, it entered into legal force last week. Any country wishing to withdraw must wait four years to do so.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But even though the United States, the world’s second-largest source of greenhouse-gas emissions, remains legally bound to the Paris plan for four years, there will be no legal consequences or economic sanctions if Mr. Trump does not follow through with the Obama administration’s commitment. Under the accord, Mr. Obama promised that the United States would cut emissions up to 28 percent from 2005 levels by 2025, largely through a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations on coal-fired power plants.  Mr. Trump could not immediately block the E.P.A. rules, but over the course of his administration he could ensure that they are weakened or rolled back. Currently, the rules are facing a legal challenge by 28 states and dozens of companies, and the case is expected to go before the Supreme Court as soon as next year. By appointing an industry-friendly Supreme Court justice and failing to argue for the rules, President Trump could weigh the court against them. He could also direct the E.P.A. to rewrite the regulations to be far more lax.  Beyond Mr. Trump’s remarks challenging the science of climate change, he has taken steps to translate those views into policy. The head of environmental policy on his transition team is Myron Ebell, who directs energy and environment policy at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank, and has gained national prominence for his polarizing skepticism of climate science. Also informing Mr. Trump’s transition team is Michael McKenna, an influential Republican energy lobbyist who has urged Republican lawmakers to deny climate science.  — CORAL DAVENPORT  _____  Health Care  Mr. Trump has promised to repeal Mr. Obama’s singular domestic achievement, the Affordable Care Act, and Republicans in Congress have shown the way. Republicans will not have the 60 votes in the Senate needed to pass most major legislation, but through a parliamentary procedure called budget “reconciliation,” they have already done a dry run to gut the existing law without facing a Democratic filibuster.  “Trump can start undoing the law administratively, but most of the action will lie with Congress,” said Chris Jacobs, a conservative health policy analyst who used to work for Republicans on Capitol Hill.  Many provisions of the health law are now deeply embedded in the nation’s health care system. Uprooting them would be a complex political and logistical challenge. Insurers now accept the idea that they cannot deny insurance, or charge higher prices, to people who have been ill.  And Congress may not move instantly to roll back the law without a clear idea of how to replace it — how to insure the 20 million people who have gained coverage under the Affordable Care Act.  Moreover, the Trump administration will not be able to reverse unilaterally the expansion of Medicaid authorized by the health care law. Thirty-one states, including some with Republican governors, have expanded eligibility, with big infusions of federal money. Many of these states would balk at efforts to undo the expansion of Medicaid. The new Medicaid beneficiaries and health care providers, including hospitals, would also fight to preserve the expansion of Medicaid.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  So the political environment could change immensely. Congress may spend months on hearings, debate and legislative maneuvering before making radical changes in the health law, on which public opinion has always been deeply divided. An army of lobbyists for doctors, hospitals, consumers, drug makers and insurance companies will descend on Capitol Hill to shape the legislation.  The requirement for most Americans to carry insurance — the “individual mandate,” enforced through tax penalties — is one of the most unpopular provisions of the law and is a prime target for Republicans eager to dismantle it. Republicans could also pass legislation to lift the requirement for larger employers to offer coverage to their workers, under the employer mandate.  Photo  It is not certain that Congress would repeal the health law in its entirety, but Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress could definitely shift direction, reducing the role of government in health insurance markets, cutting back federal regulation and requirements so insurance would cost less and no-frills options could proliferate.  Mr. Trump would encourage the sale of insurance across state lines, in a bid to increase competition. He and the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, have said they will convert Medicaid, now an open-ended entitlement, into a block grant, giving each state a lump sum of federal money to provide health care to low-income people.  And Mr. Trump would encourage greater use of health savings accounts and let people take tax deductions for insurance premium payments.  — ROBERT PEAR  _____  Economic Policy  Republican control of Washington sets the stage for a sweeping shift in economic policy. Mr. Trump has proposed a fairly standard set of conservative prescriptions, such as lower taxes and less regulation, with one notable departure: a promise to reduce trade with other nations.  The centerpiece of Mr. Trump’s plans is a major overhaul of the federal tax code. Mr. Trump has proposed a sharp reduction in the taxation of businesses and a series of changes that would reduce income taxes for most American households. The wealthiest households would see by far the largest reductions in taxes.  The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimated that Mr. Trump’s plan would cut federal revenues by $6.2 trillion over the next decade — a significantly larger reduction than the last major round of cuts under President George W. Bush in 2001 and 2003.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The plan reduces tax rates for most kinds of income. The top personal income tax rate, for example, would fall to 33 percent from 39.6 percent. The corporate income tax rate would fall to 15 percent from 35 percent. The resulting loss of revenue would be partly offset by eliminating loopholes and limiting deductions.  Such changes would require legislation, but Mr. Trump’s proposal shares considerable common ground with a plan advanced by House Republicans. And through budget reconciliation, major tax cuts — such as Mr. Bush’s — have been passed with simple majority votes in both chambers.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump and his advisers have insisted that these cuts would not increase the federal debt, in part because they say faster growth would increase tax revenues. Previous tax cuts, however, have not produced anything like the projected increase.  Mr. Trump has also promised to make deep but unspecific cuts in federal spending.  At the same time, however, Mr. Trump has said that he would like to increase federal spending on the military, and on infrastructure like roads and bridges.  An analysis by the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimated that Mr. Trump’s plans would increase the federal debt by $5.3 trillion over the next decade, and raise the ratio of debt to gross domestic product to 105 percent.  Mr. Trump also has promised to reduce federal regulation. Business groups argue that the Obama administration has impeded economic growth by significantly expanding regulation in areas including environmental and worker protections.  He has specifically promised to reverse some new environmental rules, such as the climate change regulations on power plants. Earlier this year, he also proposed the “dismantling” of the Dodd-Frank Act, which overhauled federal regulation of the financial industry in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. The act created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a likely target for Republican legislators.  Mr. Trump also has promised a major shift in trade policy. He says he will increase American manufacturing by reducing imports from China and other nations.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  His victory almost certainly seals the demise of the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership, which the Obama administration negotiated with Japan and other Pacific Rim nations. Mr. Trump also pledged repeatedly to renegotiate or abandon existing trade agreements, notably the North American Free Trade Agreement, or Nafta, which has increased American trade with Canada and Mexico. He also has threatened a variety of sanctions against American companies that move manufacturing jobs overseas, although the legality of such measures is unclear.  Republicans who broadly agree with Mr. Trump on taxes and regulation may have greater reservations about his views on trade. The party has long supported increased trade among nations. But Mr. Trump is the party’s new leader.  — BINYAMIN APPELBAUM
Mrs. Clinton, in her first remarks to supporters after the election, said Americans owed Mr. Trump “an open mind and a chance to lead.” Choking back tears at times, she said she was “sorry that we did not win this election for the values we share and the vision we hold for our country.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This is painful, and it will be for a long time,” Mrs. Clinton said, standing beside her husband, former President Bill Clinton, in a tableau that underscored the end of a nearly 25-year era in which the Clintons dominated American politics.  The clash between excitement and dread was especially palpable over the likelihood that Mr. Trump, at the head of a unified Republican government, would try to reverse Obama administration policies and appoint a conservative Supreme Court justice. The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, indicated on Wednesday that Republicans would try to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and Democrats privately began strategizing to thwart that agenda. Republicans also expanded their power in state capitals, and Democrats pledged resistance.  Foreign leaders who have had tense relations with Mr. Obama were particularly welcoming to Mr. Trump. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel called Mr. Trump “a true friend” of Israel, while President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said he hoped to have a “constructive dialogue” with him. Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin had previously exchanged warm words, to the consternation of both Democratic and Republican leaders, but Trump advisers said on Wednesday that the two leaders had not spoken by phone yet.  Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, whose immigration policies Mr. Trump has dismissed as “insane,” offered her cooperation but emphasized the importance of human rights, while President François Hollande of France noted that some of Mr. Trump’s views might test “the values and the interests that we share with the United States.” Mexican officials congratulated Mr. Trump but said they would not pay for his proposed border wall, as he has flatly insisted they will.  Mr. Trump’s campaign advisers said on Wednesday that he had been fielding calls from politicians like Mr. Ryan and world leaders, while also assembling a cabinet and White House team and selecting a conservative nominee for the Supreme Court vacancy. They said Mr. Trump was inclined to roll out a few cabinet nominations at a time, rather than kicking them off with one high-profile pick for a critical department like Treasury or State.  Among the candidates for cabinet secretaries and advisers are members of Mr. Trump’s inner circle, aides said, including Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a crucial adviser on policy issues; Steven Mnuchin, a businessman who was Mr. Trump’s national finance chairman; Rudolph W. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York; Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey; and Newt Gingrich, a former speaker of the House.  Advisers said Mr. Trump had also started thinking about ways to unite the country. Democratic leaders quickly embraced a policy priority that he highlighted in his victory speech: infrastructure spending.  Still, more than a third of Americans said in exit polls on Tuesday that they would be frightened of a Trump presidency. Among those who voted for Mrs. Clinton, the feeling was almost unanimous: 92 percent said Mr. Trump scared them.  How Will a Trump Presidency Affect Your Country? We want to hear from readers outside the United States on the election of Donald J. Trump. We may publish a selection of the responses. Queremos saber qué opinan nuestros lectores afuera de Estados Unidos tras la elección de Donald Trump como presidente de Estados Unidos. Algunas de estas respuestas podrían ser publicadas. Required fields are marked with an asterisk. How do you think a Trump presidency will affect you and your family? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump te afectará a ti y a tu familia? Continue How do you think a Trump presidency will affect your country? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump afectará a tu país? If you had a meeting with the president-elect, what is one thing you would tell him about your life and your country that could inform his foreign policy? Si te pudieras reunir con el presidente electo, ¿qué le contarías sobre tu vida y tu país para informar sus decisiones de política exterior? Continue What is your name? * ¿Cómo te llamas? Where are you from? * ¿De dónde eres? What is your phone number? ¿Cuál es tu teléfono? By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service. Thank you for your submission.  Anxieties ran strong among Hispanics, African-Americans, Muslims, immigrants, women and others who had felt disparaged or demonized by Mr. Trump, who used harsh and racially charged language in ways that upended mainstream politics. The fact that Mr. Trump had been endorsed by a Ku Klux Klan newspaper, even if he rejected it, symbolized the sense of shock that he would now lead a vibrantly diverse democracy.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Alma Guel, 59, of El Paso, let out a long sigh as she started talking through the levels of emotional distress she had felt over the last 24 hours. She felt outrage, disbelief, then suspicion that the outcome was legitimate, then ashamed. She even started looking at property to buy in Mexico. Eventually, she just felt crushed.  “I was just heartbroken,” said Ms. Guel, who works in the safety department of her local electric company. “And all day today, I’ve been in a daze. I’ve never, ever been this affected by any other election.”  Many conservatives felt just as strongly — but in the opposite direction. The conservative radio host Laura Ingraham was overcome with emotion on her show Wednesday. “You’re bringing tears to my eyes,” she told the Republican strategist Ed Rollins as she beamed over the meaning of Mr. Trump’s win.  Jacob Stout, 20, who owns a small contracting business in Danville, Ky., said the result thrilled him because of the promise of bold action in Washington. “I’m excited, man. I’m not going to lie,” he said. “We’ve seen, especially the last eight years, talk but not drastic change that benefits the citizens. The idea that a citizen would be taking the presidency as opposed to a politician, I think that’s got people excited.”  Photo  His wife, Chloe Joslin, 24, was more tempered in her expectations, even though she also voted for Mr. Trump.  “Oh, my goodness, you see people who are disowning friends over who they are voting for,” said Ms. Joslin, a communications instructor. “It’s been a very heated race.”  Politicians also joined business leaders, as well as the many Americans with retirement and savings accounts, in keeping a nervous eye on the world financial markets, fearing the sort of backlash that wounded Britain after its vote in June to leave the European Union. While some business leaders worried that the nation would slide into recession, others were hopeful that Mr. Trump’s proposals of tax cuts, infrastructure spending and relaxed regulations would be welcomed by the markets, which reversed sharp declines overnight.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Political activity and reactions in both parties were in a surreal state of suspended animation as Republicans and Democrats began anticipating Mr. Trump’s moves. Mr. Ryan said at a news conference Wednesday that Mr. Trump had a “mandate” for his vision of government, but was sparing on the details of how they would work together. Mr. Ryan stopped campaigning for him last month after revelations that Mr. Trump had boasted about sexual assault.  Mr. Ryan said that he had “spoken with Donald twice in the last 18 hours.”  “We talked about the work ahead of us, and the importance of bringing the nation together,” he said. “This needs to be a time of redemption, not a time of recrimination.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Ryan could have been hinting at his own fate. There are more than a few restless conservatives in his conference in the House who were agitating for his ouster before the election because of his failure to fully embrace Mr. Trump. And whether that discontent will die down is far from clear.  Other Republicans who made their reservations about Mr. Trump proudly known before the election tried to be gracious, though some sounded more skeptical than optimistic.  Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who became a public face of the anti-Trump faction on Capitol Hill, said he and his family had asked God to steer Mr. Trump in the right direction. “We pray that he will lead wisely and faithfully keep his oath to a Constitution of limited government,” Mr. Sasse said in a statement.  Then he promised to hold Mr. Trump to his word. “Starting today, I will do everything in my power to hold the president to his promises,” he said.  Elsewhere, the transition of power seemed to be unfolding in an orderly fashion. Word came from the Pentagon on Wednesday morning that Mr. Trump would begin receiving the same classified intelligence briefings as the president. And the defense secretary, Ashton B. Carter, said in a statement that he was committed to a smooth passing of power to the next commander in chief.
And she ceded the white working-class voters who backed Mr. Clinton in 1992. Though she would never have won this demographic, her husband insisted that her campaign aides do more to try to cut into Mr. Trump’s support with these voters. They declined, reasoning that she was better off targeting college-educated suburban voters by hitting Mr. Trump on his temperament.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Instead, they targeted the emerging electorate of young, Latino and African-American voters who catapulted Mr. Obama to victory twice, expecting, mistakenly, that this coalition would support her in nearly the same numbers. They did not.  In the end, Mr. Trump’s simple promise to “Make America Great Again,” a catchphrase Mrs. Clinton dismissed as a vow to return to a racist past already long disappeared, would draw enough white Americans to the polls to make up for his low minority support.  “The emerging demographic majority isn’t quite there yet,” said Anita Dunn, a Democratic strategist and former White House communications director. “The idea you can get to a presidential campaign and just press a button and they’ll vote, it’s not there yet.”  Mrs. Clinton had planned to conclude her 19-month campaign with an elaborate victory celebration on Tuesday night, complete with confetti shaped like glass shards that would fall from the glass ceiling of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Midtown Manhattan — an extravagant production to mark the history of the evening.  Instead, in a hastily scheduled speech in a dreary hotel ballroom on Wednesday, Mrs. Clinton gave her concession speech, declaring the country “more deeply divided than we thought.”  “This loss hurts,” she said. “But please never stop believing that fighting for what’s right is worth it.”  The weaknesses in her candidacy, Ms. Dunn and other Democratic leaders said on Wednesday, were more than demographic. Though she and outside groups raised half a billion dollars to take on Mr. Trump with the most sophisticated ground game modern politics had seen, spanning the barrios of Orlando, Fla., black churches of North Carolina and the casinos of Nevada, the rationale for her run seemed more of a repudiation of Mr. Trump than Mrs. Clinton’s own positive vision for the country.  Even Mrs. Clinton’s closing chant in the final days of her campaign — “Love trumps hate!” — sounded like a play on her opponent’s name rather than her own inspiring vision.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Her campaign had built-in contradictions and challenges. She wanted to make history as the first female president, but she did not want to play it up so much so that she would turn off men. She vowed to help the little guy, but she accepted millions of dollars for speeches to Wall Street. She wanted to bring the country together, but she suffered from a stubbornly high number of voters who did not trust or like her.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign tested out 84 slogans. There was “She’s Got Your Back,” “Strength You Can Count On” and “Real Fairness, Real Solutions.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Do we have any sense from her what she believes or wants her core message to be?” Joel Benenson, the campaign’s chief strategist and pollster, asked the chairman of her campaign, John D. Podesta, ahead of a New Hampshire speech, according to a hacked email that was among the thousands released by WikiLeaks.  Mrs. Clinton had defeated Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the primary race by rallying older African-American voters and Democratic women, but she seemed disconnected from the white working class that delivered Mr. Sanders’s victories in Michigan and Wisconsin. Mr. Trump won Wisconsin on Tuesday and appeared to have narrowly won Michigan, as well.  He won 67 percent of the vote among non-college-educated whites, compared with 28 percent for Mrs. Clinton, according to exit polls.  Early on, Mr. Clinton had pleaded with Robby Mook, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager, to do more outreach with working-class white and rural voters. But his advice fell on deaf ears.  The sophisticated data modeling Mr. Mook relied on showed that young, Latino and black voters would turn out as they had hoped. But while they favored Mrs. Clinton overwhelmingly, she could not run up the score with them like Mr. Obama had in 2012.  With voters 29 and younger, for example, Mrs. Clinton won by 18 points, down from Mr. Obama’s 22 points in 2012, and 29 points in 2008, according to exit polls conducted by Edison Research.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The Clinton campaign was also betting on college-educated suburban voters who ended up drifting away from Mrs. Clinton in the final days, which the campaign attributes to the F.B.I.’s renewed focus on her emails as early voting began.  A spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, Brian Fallon, said the campaign did not cede white working-class voters to Mr. Trump, pointing to a bus tour Mr. and Mrs. Clinton and her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, went on in rural pockets of Ohio and Pennsylvania after the Democratic National Convention in July. He added that shaving into Mr. Trump’s lead among these voters would not have given Mrs. Clinton a path to victory.  The campaign also appeared to overestimate how offended Mr. Trump’s female supporters would be by an “Access Hollywood” recording in which Mr. Trump is heard bragging about grabbing women by the genitals. Mr. Trump lost among women by 12 percentage points, exit polls showed, about the same deficit Mitt Romney had in 2012.  In the final weeks of the campaign, a despondent Mr. Clinton held a flurry of his own events in Ohio, Iowa, the Florida Panhandle and Wisconsin, talking to the white voters who like him but who view his wife with distrust.  “I think Bill Clinton was right” about the need to concentrate more in those areas, said Jay S. Jacobs, a prominent New York Democrat, pointing to Mr. Trump’s victories in Wisconsin, Ohio and Michigan, states Mrs. Clinton’s campaign had largely overlooked.  Former Gov. Edward G. Rendell of Pennsylvania also said he had encouraged campaign aides at Mrs. Clinton’s Brooklyn headquarters to spread their vast resources outside Philadelphia and Pittsburgh and focus on rural white pockets of the state. “We had the resources to do both,” Mr. Rendell said Wednesday. “The campaign — and this was coming from Brooklyn — didn’t want to do it.” (Mr. Trump won Pennsylvania by one percentage point.)  But Mr. Jacobs and others said Mrs. Clinton’s campaign leadership thought Mrs. Clinton was an imperfect messenger to connect with Rust Belt voters on issues like global trade deals, which she had previously supported.  “In 2000 and 2008, working-class voters saw her as their champion — it was the core of her support,” said Mark Penn, the chief strategist of Mrs. Clinton’s 2008 campaign. “By 2016, issues of trade, stagnated wages and immigration had piled up, and Trump was successful at exploiting those against her.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The situation was made worse in September, when Mrs. Clinton described half of Trump supporters as a “basket of deplorables.” Afterward, she told one adviser that she knew she had “just stepped in it.”  And in the end, Mr. Trump’s Twitter feed proved more powerful than any of Mrs. Clinton’s poll-tested slogans, said Hank Sheinkopf, a veteran Democratic political consultant.  “Class anger won,” he said, delivering a staggering defeat to the Clinton strategy of “more money, more consultants, more polling and more of a campaign based on what we thought we knew rather than what the electorate felt.”
Photo  Donald J. Trump, the president-elect, was subdued in his triumph on Wednesday, cloistering himself in New York City with a handful of aides and family members as he turned toward the enormous task of assembling a government.  For all his boisterousness during the campaign, Mr. Trump was more muted than exuberant in its aftermath, according to people who spoke with him throughout the day. His victory over Hillary Clinton caught even him by surprise: Like Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Trump tracked the race through private polling that indicated he was headed for defeat, and he went all but silent in his apartment on Tuesday night as the returns from Florida turned in his favor.  A startled Mr. Trump fielded conciliatory phone calls from political dignitaries, including Republicans who resisted his candidacy, like Presidents George Bush and George W. Bush, and from Democrats with whom he may clash in office, like Nancy Pelosi, the minority leader in the House of Representatives.  But Mr. Trump said nothing in public, and as the political world reeled from his electoral success, the president-elect and his advisers did little to address the array of questions hanging over Trump Tower.  Photo  Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a close ally of Mr. Trump’s who had been assigned to lead the transition process, emerged from the skyscraper around 4:30 in the afternoon but rebuffed requests for comment. (“No interviews today,” he said.)  Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, emerging from meetings in the early evening, said Mr. Trump and his team would soon “move forward to a more specific agenda,” but did not elaborate. “I’ll just say the team has done what transitions traditionally do at this point,” he added.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Up to now, aides to Mr. Trump said, the team of advisers working on a potential transition has labored more or less in segregation from the campaign apparatus.  Over the summer, Mr. Trump collected a few practiced Washington hands to help him design an administration, including veterans of the first Bush administration and Mitt Romney’s presidential campaign.  Among them were Jamie Burke and William Hagerty, both former Romney advisers, and Ado Machida, a former aide to Vice President Dick Cheney.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But Mr. Trump remained preoccupied almost exclusively with the campaign and refused to discuss the transition with his aides out of superstition, according to two people briefed on the process.  He took few steps to recruit a conventional team of Washington veterans who might accompany him into government, after the fashion of past candidates like George W. Bush, who assembled something of a national security shadow cabinet ahead of the 2000 general election.  Mr. Trump held a few meetings on Wednesday to spur that process, huddling with a group that included his children; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; and Stephen K. Bannon, the chairman of Breitbart News Network, who helped steer Mr. Trump’s campaign. Mr. Trump met separately with a group of aides to Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, his running mate, along with Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner.  Michael O. Leavitt, a former governor of Utah who managed Mr. Romney’s transition team, said Mr. Trump’s transition would probably focus at first on a few key appointments, like naming a White House chief of staff.  Mr. Leavitt said he met several times with Mr. Trump’s team to discuss the mechanics of transition planning, and described it as a “full-blown” operation.  Photo  “There are whole series of things that have to happen: getting a team on the field, beginning to lay out the how-to of the commitments the president-elect has made,” Mr. Leavitt said. “Right now, they’re going to be focused mostly on personnel and logistics.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Yet the transition aides in Washington were given a limited mandate for mapping out an administration, people briefed on their efforts said. They were asked to line up potential candidates for cabinet-level offices, but not to fill out full staff rosters for federal departments and agencies, one person said.  There is no extensive process underway for vetting potential Trump appointees. The names in circulation on Wednesday for the high offices of state were largely drawn from the tight circle of political true believers who surrounded Mr. Trump during the campaign: Rudolph W. Giuliani, former mayor of New York; Steven Mnuchin, the chief fund-raiser for Mr. Trump’s campaign; and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who struck up a friendship with Mr. Trump.  Within that group, Mr. Giuliani may be the most likely to receive a coveted appointment, as a reward for his slash-and-burn campaigning in the general election.  Mr. Christie, too, is seen as a candidate for the cabinet, but his entanglement in a continuing political retribution scandal in New Jersey could make it difficult for him to be confirmed by the Senate.
Photo  WASHINGTON — The election of Donald J. Trump means that Justice Antonin Scalia’s seat, vacant since he died in February, will almost certainly be filled by a conservative nominee. Back to full strength, the court will again tilt right, as it has for decades.  And with the court’s two senior liberal members fairly old, that may be only the start. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg is 83, and Justice Stephen G. Breyer is 78.  Mr. Trump’s surprising triumph vindicates Republican senators, who refused to act on President Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland, saying the choice of a new Supreme Court justice should belong to the next president. It now belongs to Mr. Trump.  “Senate Republicans’ strategy of not even considering Garland, of letting the American people decide who gets to fill Scalia’s seat, worked,” said Ilya Shapiro, a lawyer with the Cato Institute, a libertarian group. “Not only that, but it didn’t at all hurt vulnerable senators running for re-election.”  But some liberals said they hoped that even a Supreme Court dominated by conservative justices, including ones on Mr. Trump’s list of 21 possible nominees vetted by conservative legal groups, could serve as a restraint on Mr. Trump’s ambitions.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Given that many of the conservatives on his list are more in the traditional conservative mold than Trump himself, they might not simply write him a blank check when it comes to actions and policies that threaten constitutional structure,” said Elizabeth Wydra, the president of the Constitutional Accountability Center. “As is the case during every administration of either party, the court will inevitably be asked to step in and serve the judicial branch’s role as a check on the political branches.”  In the short term, the court led by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. is poised to return to the status quo: closely divided, leaning right, with the crucial vote belonging to Justice Anthony M. Kennedy. “He may have been the biggest winner last night,” Mr. Shapiro said of Justice Kennedy.  Mr. Trump’s election represents a lost opportunity for liberals, and they are fearful of what comes next at the Supreme Court.  “On the brink of having the first liberal-leaning Supreme Court in decades, the judicial left has now been banished to the wilderness for perhaps decades more,” said Barry Friedman, a law professor at New York University. “It is difficult seeing a path to anything other than a yet more conservative court for the imaginable future.”  The balance of power at the Supreme Court could truly shift if there is a second vacancy while Mr. Trump is president. That appears entirely possible.  Justice Ginsburg, who was harshly critical of Mr. Trump and seemed to predict a victory for Hillary Clinton, will face second-guessing over her decision to stay on the court rather than let Mr. Obama try to appoint her successor.  Other retirements are possible, too. Justice Kennedy, the member of the court at its ideological center, is 80.  “In the worst case, we end up with a 7-2 conservative court, and a relatively young one at that,” Professor Friedman said. “This could be a typhoon for the Supreme Court. An already very conservative jurisprudence will deepen and may broaden, encompassing areas that had long been resistant, such as abortion rights.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For now, abortion rights appear secure. In June, the court struck down a restrictive Texas abortion law by a 5-to-3 vote, with Justice Kennedy joining the court’s four-member liberal wing. A new justice opposed to abortion rights would tighten that tally but not tip it.  Similarly, affirmative action seems safe in the short term. In June, the court upheld a race-conscious admissions program at the University of Texas by a 4-to-3 vote. Justice Elena Kagan was recused but would almost certainly have voted with the majority, making the effective vote 5 to 3. Here again, a single Trump appointment would not change things.  But a second Trump appointment is another matter, said Lee Epstein, a law professor and political scientist at Washington University in St. Louis. “We could see dramatic legal change,” she said, “with the recent affirmative action and abortion cases on the chopping block.”  Other areas of the law could be subject to faster change after a single Trump appointment. A threat to public-sector unions that ended in a deadlock in March, for instance, could soon reach the court again. This time, the challengers are likely to gain a fifth vote.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The last term’s other major deadlock, over Mr. Obama’s plan to spare millions of unauthorized immigrants from deportation and allow them to work legally in the United States, will almost certainly be resolved without court intervention; Mr. Trump has vowed to take a different path on immigration.  He is also likely to use his executive authority to undo the Obama administration’s approach to climate change, transgender rights and clashes between religious beliefs and contraception coverage, again effectively pulling the plug on pending challenges in the courts.  The Supreme Court decides about 70 cases a year, reviewing only a tiny fraction of the hundreds of thousands of lawsuits and prosecutions filed in federal courts. The lower federal courts are for now dominated by Democratic appointees, and the vast majority of their decisions escape Supreme Court review. In the short term, that leaves plenty of room for significant and lasting liberal victories in the lower federal courts.  But the compositions of those courts will start to change, too, as Mr. Trump appoints judges to them. If his list of potential Supreme Court nominees is any guide, his lower-court appointments will also pull the law to the right.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In the meantime, the replacement of Justice Scalia with another conservative would return the Supreme Court to a familiar dynamic, said Ms. Wydra of the Constitutional Accountability Center.  “That means conservative legal activists will once again be able to attempt aggressive changes that push the law even further to the right,” she said, “but there will still be the potential for more progressive rulings like the marriage equality and abortion rulings we saw from the court even with Scalia.”  Almost all of the candidates on Mr. Trump’s list of potential nominees are sitting judges, and several served as law clerks to conservative Supreme Court justices. Many have judicial track records hostile to federal power, abortion rights and same-sex marriage.  By training and temperament, judges move more slowly than politicians, and they have different values.  “An open question is what happens when Trump realizes that the sorts of judges he’s been advised to appoint would rule against him on various matters,” said Mr. Shapiro of the Cato Institute.
Photo  Call it pink and blue America.  To the many divides this ugly presidential campaign has exposed, add the chasm over the treatment of women, the plight of men and the proper roles of each.  This was an election that showed how much we still talk past one another when we talk about gender. It made plain profound gaps in how men and women perceive one another’s lives and prerogatives.  This was an election in which the grievances of white men — their economic upheaval, their cultural displacement — exploded. The fallout included toxic paroxysms of racism, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and sexism. Misogyny, it appears, thrives in corners of the United States.  Donald J. Trump’s hyper-masculinity — the sexual swagger, the belittling of his opponents, his need to dominate — appealed to some men who believed he could restore them to their rightful place.  Yet men at Trump rallies also spoke of their faith that Mr. Trump, whose business acumen they revered, would bring an outsider’s willingness to take on the elites who put them down.  Photo  The campaign became a battle of two caricatures: male chauvinist pig against scheming, dishonest woman. It exposed parallel universes. In one, women flooded social media with their memories of sexual assault after Mr. Trump was caught on tape boasting about forcing himself on women. In another, men dismissed the tape as locker room talk or were surprised at how many women told them such harassment was commonplace.  This is an intimate divide. The boundaries of pink and blue America are fluid, and they come up within households and communities. The gender chasm is bound up with class and confounds easy categorization. There are men who embrace violent misogyny and men who deplore it, women who shrugged off the “Access Hollywood” tape and hate Hillary Clinton with as much fervor as any man. A majority of white women voted for Mr. Trump, exit polls by Edison Research suggest.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  While polling does not reach into individual marriages, the results suggest a marital gap — 58 percent of married men voted for Mr. Trump compared with 47 percent of married women, according to exit polls. A YouGov poll published on Oct. 9 offered a glimpse into what the veteran pollster Celinda Lake calls the “Sure, Honey” factor: Forty-four percent of married women said they planned to vote for Mrs. Clinton; 33 percent of married men said they thought their spouse would vote for her.  As in politics, so in the workplace. At work, women have made substantial inroads and dominate the fastest-growing (and lower paid) segments of the economy, the “pink collar” industries such as health and education. More than a fifth of American men between 20 and 65 had no paid work last year.  But men consistently underestimate the barriers that women confront. In a study of more than 34,000 employees at 132 companies, 54 percent of men thought that the best opportunities would go to the most deserving employees regardless of gender; just 44 percent of women believed that. The survey, conducted by Lean In and McKinsey and Company and released in late September, found that a third of women thought their gender was a disadvantage in getting a raise or promotion.  Photo  On campus, young men and women are facing off over what is assault and what is a sexual pass gone awry. Young men frequently protest that they are denied due process in campus hearings of sexual assault; young women charge that their attackers too often go unpunished.  Even reading habits diverge: Women read mysteries and true crime; men read science fiction and history, according to Peter Hildick-Smith, the president of Codex Group, which surveys reading patterns.  There has been much talk of healing in this fervid season. The racism that President Obama’s election forced to the surface emboldened the so-called alt-right, but also forced many white Americans to acknowledge lasting inequities. That may well be the case during the tenure of President Trump: an eruption of sexism and an inability to deny its virulence.  “Some men have this feeling that women are coming — in education, on polls, on social media, they have a voice,” said Marianne Cooper, a sociologist at Stanford’s Clayman Institute for Gender Research. “This upends a long history of women knowing their place.”  Katy Cockrell, 25, backed Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, but found herself weeping as she cast a vote for Mrs. Clinton and thought of her grandmothers. “They lived in this ‘Mad Men’ era, and I thought about how much I admired them as they fought the sexism they’d experienced,” she said.  Photo  Now, she added of Mr. Trump, “the tough part for me and women of all ages is that we are going to look at him every day and be reminded of every time we’ve faced sexism in our own lives.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ron Ritz, who attended a Trump rally in Ambridge, Pa., last month, saw in Mrs. Clinton a symbol of all that’s gone wrong in his world. Steel and energy companies once dotted the area; now they are gone. “We had industries that shut down,” Mr. Ritz, 69, said. “People have no jobs, things are bad. And she turns around and tells them they’re deplorable. That’s like kicking a dog that’s tied.”  Some research has found a backlash when men feel they are losing their status.  Iris Bohnet, the director of the Women and Public Policy Program at Harvard Kennedy School, is a behavioral economist who believes in the principle of “nudging” people toward social norms. That typically means telling people, for example, that their friends have voted in order to prompt them to vote, too.  To test if she could induce diversity in hiring, Ms. Bohnet told research volunteers that the group before them had hired a predominantly female team. Men balked and chose to hire more men than women, she found.  So what comes next, now that Mr. Trump has defied political convention and political correctness? Some of the men who feel pushed aside are looking to him to rebalance the scales they feel have tipped against them. Many women are wondering whether words and deeds that a half-century of feminism tried to put off limits will now be acceptable.  The pink and blue divide may prove as deep, fractious and mutually incomprehensible as the red and blue.
The president invited Mr. Trump to visit the White House on Thursday, and in his remarks, Mr. Obama struck a conciliatory tone toward his successor. “We all want what’s best for this country,” he said. “That’s what I heard in Mr. Trump’s remarks last night. That’s what I heard when I spoke to him directly. And I was heartened by that.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama also said he “could not be prouder” of Hillary Clinton. But as the White House absorbed her defeat and cranked up the machinery to transfer power to Mr. Trump, there was an undercurrent of anger among his allies that she had squandered the opportunity left to her by a popular president.  “President Obama, with an approval rating above 50 and an unemployment rate below 5, did all he could to set the table for a Democrat to succeed him,” said Dan Pfeiffer, a former senior adviser to Mr. Obama.  “Barack Obama will go down in history as one of America’s most consequential presidents,” Mr. Pfeiffer added. “Tuesday is a bitter pill to swallow, but it won’t change that fact.”  The president’s remarks capped an emotional day at the White House. Dozens of staff members spilled into the Rose Garden to applaud their boss. Just before he spoke, Mr. Obama pulled a handful of aides into the Oval Office for a pep talk. Earlier on Wednesday morning, several had cried during the daily senior staff meeting.  As night fell, Mr. Obama welcomed current and former members of his cabinet to the White House for a thank-you party that was supposed to have been a celebration of Mrs. Clinton’s victory and his administration’s work. Instead, it was a gathering of stunned officials, and an aide said Mrs. Clinton would not attend.  For weeks, Mr. Obama campaigned like a happy warrior for Mrs. Clinton. But asking people to vote to preserve his legacy was less effective than asking them to vote for him.  Some former officials held out hope that the president’s health care legacy could be preserved, saying that Mr. Trump would hesitate to deprive 20 million people of health insurance without any substitute, and that Republican lawmakers, having spent more time trying to scrap the existing law than shape a new one, have no consensus on a replacement.  New presidents are often less zealous in unraveling their predecessors’ achievements than in vowing to do so on the campaign trail. Richard M. Nixon left Lyndon B. Johnson’s Great Society legislation largely intact; Ronald Reagan, after defeating Jimmy Carter, did not kill off the Education Department.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “By the time people go after these institutions, they have constituencies of their own,” said Robert Dallek, a presidential historian. He added, “Given the impulsiveness and the way he goes from pillar to post, it’s impossible to predict what Trump will do.”  Mr. Trump could undermine a major part of the health law by directing the Justice Department to alter its position in a lawsuit filed by House Republicans. At issue in the litigation are “cost-sharing subsidies” that help pay doctor and hospital bills for millions of lower-income people. A federal district judge has already ruled against the administration, finding that Congress never appropriated money for these subsidies.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Republicans will not have a 60-vote majority in the Senate, so they could not overcome a filibuster by Democrats trying to preserve the law. But Republicans could dismantle other elements, including the expansion of Medicaid, using a budget procedure known as reconciliation, which does not require a supermajority. Congress approved such a reconciliation bill in January, which Mr. Obama promptly vetoed.  The president’s big international agreements face a similarly perilous future. If Mr. Trump were to pull the United States out of the Paris climate accord — which he has vowed to do, labeling climate change a “hoax” — the agreement to reduce carbon dioxide emissions would remain legally binding on the United States for four years, but it would lose much of its impact.  Mr. Obama’s mammoth Asian trade deal, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, was in political trouble even before the election. Now, analysts said, it is unlikely to ever get a vote.  Mr. Trump has said he would have struck a better nuclear deal with Iran, suggesting he might try to reopen talks. But four other countries also signed the deal, and there is no sign that they would go along with him.  Reopening negotiations could also prompt Iran to restart its uranium centrifuges, putting the country back on a path to a nuclear weapon. But the Iranians have been unhappy with the existing deal because the United States has not lifted direct sanctions, chilling foreign investment. That could provide Mr. Trump with an opening, experts said.  “Reopening the agreement means reopening it for the Iranians, too,” said Martin S. Indyk, executive vice president of the Brookings Institution. “Given that they’re more unhappy with it than we are, President Trump may discover there’s more in this deal for our side than he first realized, especially if the alternative is that the Iranians restart their nuclear program.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama and his top advisers have always recognized the fragility of his legacy items, especially those achieved by bypassing a recalcitrant Congress. After all, the president himself began plotting almost immediately after winning the White House in 2008 how to accomplish his campaign promises, which included rolling back some of George W. Bush’s policies.  During Mr. Obama’s transition, his advisers consulted a book, “With the Stroke of a Pen,” which documented the use of executive orders throughout American history, and compiled a set of actions the president could take on his own. Now Mr. Trump is likely to do the same, said Gregory B. Craig, Mr. Obama’s first White House counsel, who led that process during his transition.  “During the first 100 days, the presidency will likely become a vehicle for moving the Republican agenda forward,” Mr. Craig said. “Nothing with Obama’s name on it is safe. It will be: ‘Let’s pull out the list of Obama’s sacred cows and slaughter them, one by one.’ ”
“The goal would be to try and get on the same page,” Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader — who was about as close as the taciturn leader comes to giddy — said as he celebrated the Republican victories at the Capitol.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “We’re going to be an enthusiastic supporter almost all the time,” he said of Mr. Trump. “When we have differences of opinion, I prefer that we work them out in private.”  President Obama’s signature domestic achievement, the Affordable Care Act, was clearly in Republicans’ sights.  “This health care law is collapsing of its own weight,” Speaker Paul D. Ryan said from Wisconsin, adding that Congress had already shown it could get a repeal bill to the president’s desk without any Democratic help. Republicans are widely believed to favor a maneuver used in budgeting that would allow them to undo the law without facing a Democratic filibuster.  Mr. McConnell demurred Wednesday on the process, but said repealing the law, which has provided health care coverage for 20 million people, is “pretty high on our agenda,” adding, “I would be shocked if we didn’t move forward and keep our commitment to the American people.”  Other issues that converge with the new president’s include the confirmation of a conservative Supreme Court justice to fill a vacancy from the death of Antonin Scalia early this year, the reduction of climate and other regulations on businesses and Wall Street, and the diminution of the role of the federal government in an array of policy areas like education.  But other priorities are far from shared. Mr. Trump spent his campaign deriding many of the cornerstone principles of his party: free trade, changes in Social Security and the United States’ posture toward Russia.  “It’s just our constitutional duty to keep the executive branch in check,” Senator-elect Todd Young, Republican of Indiana, said Wednesday.  Mr. Trump also agrees with Republicans on sharp tax cuts for businesses and most American households, especially the wealthiest. The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimated that Mr. Trump’s plan would cut federal revenue by $6.2 trillion over the next decade. Mr. McConnell said Wednesday that Republicans craved comprehensive tax reform, an area where Democrats and Republicans remained deeply divided.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. McConnell, who took a political risk that paid off when he refused to act for eight months on Mr. Obama’s Supreme Court nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland, said he looked forward to advising Mr. Trump on a nominee, but would not say whether Republicans would invoke a rules change to prevent Democrats from filibustering Mr. Trump’s choice.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  However, he hinted that they would avoid doing so, saying that majorities should not “overreach” after a big election win. “I think it’s always a mistake to misread your mandate,” Mr. McConnell said. “I don’t think we should act as if we’re going to be in power forever.”  Mr. Trump has been more impulsive than ideological in his policy goals. He has at times provided scant details, and at others reversed or greatly scaled back his stated goals, such as barring Muslims from entering the country.  Mr. Trump could work with Democrats in some areas, such as repealing carried interest deductions that benefit some investors, an action most Republicans oppose.  And he would like to invest in the nation’s highways, bridges and other infrastructure, a goal Democrats and Republicans share, though the parties do not agree on how to pay for a large-scale public works package.  Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader, called Mr. Trump on Wednesday to push for a “robust infrastructure jobs bill.”  On this front, Mr. Trump could conceivably work with Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the presumed incoming Democratic leader, who said he had already talked to Mr. Trump.  “It is time for the country to come together and heal the bitter wounds from the campaign,” Mr. Schumer said in a statement.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The biggest question going into the next Congress will be how Mr. Trump deals with Mr. Ryan, a frequent critic during the campaign. Mr. Trump often returned fire, notably when Mr. Ryan said he could no longer defend Mr. Trump’s more incendiary remarks and disinvited him from a campaign swing in Wisconsin.  But in Mr. Ryan, Mr. Trump has a built-in policy factory with a largely supportive caucus; if he signals his support for Mr. Ryan, if not all of his ideas, the two could probably forge a path forward.  “Nothing unites a political party more than a big win,” said John Feehery, a former top Republican congressional aide. “I expect G.O.P. leaders to work closely with the new Trump administration. They don’t have much of a choice at this juncture.”  Vice President-elect Mike Pence is also expected to be a bridge between the White House and Capitol Hill, and Mr. McConnell said he expected him to take on a role similar to that of former Vice President Dick Cheney, possibly attending weekly lunches with the Republican conference.  Beyond Washington, Tuesday was a good night for Republicans generally.  The party held onto the House with few losses, and made moderate gains at the state level, adding to the broad control it has been building in the states since 2010.  While Democrats had hoped the election would be a chance to start retaking ground in the states and Mr. Obama had directly worked on behalf of more than 150 local Democrats, Republicans gained at least three new governor’s offices on Tuesday. It was unclear whether they would hold on to the governor’s office in North Carolina, where final results were not expected until later this month.  In state legislatures, where Democrats had seen more opportunities, Republicans, who effectively controlled 68 of 99 chambers before Election Day, gained control of at least the Kentucky House and the Iowa Senate.  With votes in some states still being counted on Wednesday, Democrats did take some chambers, but the scope of wins was nowhere near as large as they had hoped; they took control of the New Mexico House and both chambers in Nevada.
Photo  He breezily passed along falsehoods, trafficked in outlandish conspiracy theories, and more or less asked for the scorn he received from the fact-checking guardians of probity in public life.  But in running his norm-breaking campaign, Donald J. Trump shined a light on a larger truth: Voters have had it with the artifice, emptiness and elements of corruption that pervade the country’s politics.  Mr. Trump ostensibly ran as a Republican, but he was effectively a third-party candidate who happened to campaign under the banner of one of the two major parties. Casting himself as an outsider, he not only savaged leaders in both parties but he made a mockery of nearly all the pieties of the American political system.  Mr. Trump was the most unconventional candidate in United States history, but he was a better fit than any of his competitors for this moment. That is because, while he may have represented a jarring change to a decorous political culture — no modern major party nominee had ever said the things he said — he reflected a coarser but authentic popular culture that many people have grown used to.  “Whether he was right or wrong about what he was saying, he was remarkably authentic saying it,” said Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, who saw the depth of Mr. Trump’s appeal far earlier than most in his party.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In an era when so-called message discipline has been made into a cardinal virtue for candidates, draining much of the spontaneity out of campaigns but lessening the margin for error, Mr. Trump said out loud what was on his mind. He did not have the fear of gaffes that the members of the political-industrial complex often instill in candidates.  In this, he was more honest to the realm he had entered than most of the career politicians: Like Mr. Trump, they too are consumed with their standing in polls, given to ridiculing their rivals and the news media and taken with their own talent and charm. They just do not say so in public.  The campaign moment that best testified to Mr. Trump’s unfiltered approach may have come when he was briefly relegated to the sidelines during the Republican primaries. It was when Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, under withering attack at a debate from Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, robotically repeated criticisms of President Obama that his campaign told him would be effective. In truth, the exchange only illustrated the degree to which Mr. Rubio was the antithesis of Mr. Trump, a slave to talking points.  “There’s a falsity to our politics and Donald exposed that,” said Alex Castellanos, a Republican strategist who was critical of Mr. Trump but who came to support him and even make commercials for one of the groups backing his candidacy.  Photo  And at a time when the use of data and analytics has grown so sophisticated that campaigns can pinpoint the predilections of most every voting household, Mr. Trump was an unapologetic wholesale candidate. He based his decisions for much of the campaign on instinct, crowd reaction and media reaction. And, after winning his nomination, he presciently said that he thought his and President Obama’s success was unrelated to the mechanics of their campaigns.  “I’ve always felt it was overrated,” Mr. Trump said of the trend toward a data-driven approach. “Obama got the votes much more so than his data-processing machine. And I think the same is true with me.”  Mr. Trump, of course, was not alien to politics. He spent decades observing the sometimes-seamy nature of democracy from a vantage point that afforded him insights on how transactional a business it is: He was a campaign donor.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  So when he got into the race and faced criticism from rivals and antagonistic interest groups, he was able to exact a revenge that was both vicious and revealing. He recalled all the meetings had and letters received from political figures who were singing a very different tune when they were beseeching him for a contribution. Groups like the conservative Club for Growth, for example, had no trouble overlooking his bombast if he was willing to write them a check.  More than anything, though, Mr. Trump was a creature of the news media, a manipulator of its appetite for the new, the controversial and the provocative. While something of a throwback in terms of his reading habits — he prefers newspaper hard copies — he adapted to find new avenues in which he could draw attention.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “He used modern media technology to go around you guys on a scale nobody ever dreamed possible,” Mr. Gingrich said in an interview. “If you think of his 15 million followers on social media times the totality of their followers on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, that’s the equivalent of a small cable network.”  But while other candidates also exploited the same platforms, they did so only to find a new medium for the same poll-tested bromides that voters have been deluged with for decades on television.  Mr. Trump used the platforms to serve up the same stew of the outrageous and incendiary commentary online as he did during his constant stream of rallies.  “That freshness is so hard to bottle and put in a 30-second video,” said Gov. John W. Hickenlooper of Colorado, a Democrat who is a businessman-turned-politician and who said he was curious enough about Mr. Trump’s appeal that he picked up a copy of “The Art of the Deal” this year.  Mr. Trump, added Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri, is “real and obviously flawed” but voters were willing to tolerate the flaws for what they saw as the real part of the bargain.  The question now is whether Mr. Trump has reshaped the conduct of politics in lasting ways, nudging other candidates to take risks that may endear them to voters, or if he is a singular figure of the sort that no campaign shall see his like again. No campaign, that is, other than perhaps his re-election bid.
“This isn’t all white people!” yelled Mr. English, who is black. “Minorities are voting for Trump, I’m telling you!” (Exit polls showed 87 percent of Mr. Trump’s vote came from whites; 2 percent came from blacks.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. English is the director of a state office that helps businesses owned by minorities compete for government contracts. In his work, he said, he had toured some of the most depressed counties in eastern North Carolina. Before Mr. Trump, he said, it seemed that few politicians were addressing the grievances of people who were economically wounded by free-trade deals that hastened the downfall of the textile industry.  “We need to get those jobs back,” Mr. English said. “You’ve got to be on the ground. I’m talking thousands of people who are walking around those counties unemployed.”  In Wisconsin, Beth Schmidt, chairwoman of the Rock County Republican Party, said she woke up Wednesday morning feeling happy but a little stupefied.  “As a Republican, I should be bouncing off the walls,” she said. “But I don’t know what to think.”  Photo  Ms. Schmidt, a 58-year-old mother of three adult children, is fervently against abortion. She feels that welfare is necessary, but that it has become overused. She was not one of Mr. Trump’s earliest supporters, instead favoring Marco Rubio or Carly Fiorina in the primary season. But she “moved forward” in the general election, deciding to vote for Mr. Trump in the end.  She is convinced that Mr. Trump will surround himself with smart and experienced people. “I think that you’re going to see that he will, surprisingly, bring people together,” she said. “I’m going to pray for this. As time goes on, people are going to see a different Trump.”  To Mark Harris, a businessman from Georgia, Mr. Trump’s indecorous outbursts and often crude behavior were a price worth paying for the shake-up he believed Mr. Trump would bring to government.  “A lot of the American people can put aside him being rough around the edges to take the chance on the change that he talked about,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Harris, 49, a retailer in one of Atlanta’s northern suburbs, could hardly contain his glee over Tuesday’s outcome. It was, he said, an unrestrained rejection of politicians, lobbyists and the news media. “The American people are sick and tired of the government in Washington, D.C.,” he said.  But he also had a warning for Mr. Trump: Break your promises at your peril.  “In four years’ time, we’ll see if he’s smart enough to be able to go through with what he’s promised the American people,” Mr. Harris said. “If he’s able to put into motion what he has proposed over this election, he will win in four years, hands down.”  At the same time, some supporters seem to have installed a sort of custom-built decoder of the Trumpian style, harboring a sense that some of his most audacious promises — like the plan to build a southern border wall, and make Mexico pay for it — are perhaps not best taken literally.  Joseph Connor, of Bergen County, N.J., said it was the general principles in Mr. Trump’s message that were more important, particularly the idea of getting government out of the way of commerce.  “I think it’s time to shed regulation and let Americans do great things in the world,” said Mr. Connor, who works in finance and belies the stereotype of Trump voters as working class and rural. “And I see that in Trump.”  How Will a Trump Presidency Affect Your Country? We want to hear from readers outside the United States on the election of Donald J. Trump. We may publish a selection of the responses. Queremos saber qué opinan nuestros lectores afuera de Estados Unidos tras la elección de Donald Trump como presidente de Estados Unidos. Algunas de estas respuestas podrían ser publicadas. Required fields are marked with an asterisk. How do you think a Trump presidency will affect you and your family? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump te afectará a ti y a tu familia? Continue How do you think a Trump presidency will affect your country? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump afectará a tu país? If you had a meeting with the president-elect, what is one thing you would tell him about your life and your country that could inform his foreign policy? Si te pudieras reunir con el presidente electo, ¿qué le contarías sobre tu vida y tu país para informar sus decisiones de política exterior? Continue What is your name? * ¿Cómo te llamas? Where are you from? * ¿De dónde eres? What is your phone number? ¿Cuál es tu teléfono? By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service. Thank you for your submission.  At Republicans’ election night party in Phoenix, a pair of friends, Linda M. Wright and Susan Cheatham, pumped their fists and thanked Jesus for Mr. Trump’s victory.  “He’s not going to raise our taxes,” said Ms. Wright, 58, of Phoenix.  “He’s going to protect our borders,” said Ms. Cheatham, 53, of Scottsdale.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “He won’t take our weapons away,” Ms. Wright said.  “He will appoint Supreme Court justices who will protect our Constitution,” Ms. Cheatham said.  “Yeah, protect the Constitution — that’s key,” Ms. Wright concluded.  They agreed that Mr. Trump represents their version of America: a place that loves God and cares for its military.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Nobody has the right to come into our country and steal it from me,” Ms. Wright said. “If you don’t like our country, don’t move here. Don’t come here and try to impose your religion on us.”  “Yeah,” Ms. Cheatham said, “Shariah law.”  With his proposal to ban Muslims from entering the United States and to deport all of the nation’s illegal immigrants (positions that he seems to have since altered), Mr. Trump’s campaign was bound to speak to the country’s white nationalists: In Louisiana on Tuesday, David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader who mounted an unsuccessful Senate bid, celebrated Mr. Trump’s victory.  “The great mass of his supporters, the overwhelming white vote, they also have a right to respect their heritage, their values,” he said. “I believe he’s really an advocate of Western Christian civilization.”  But Mr. Duke rejected the idea that racism was part of Mr. Trump’s message. So did Bridg Webb, 21, who was walking into a celebratory Republican rally at the Rice-Eccles football stadium of the University of Utah on Tuesday.  On the way, Mr. Webb said, someone drove by him and shouted, “Nazis!” That, he said, was exactly what Mr. Trump’s opponents — in the news media, on the left, in urban centers — failed to grasp about voters like him.  Photo  “I’ve been called a bigot; I’ve been called a white supremacist,” he said. “I pride myself on being a good guy. I go out of my way to help people. All these things are so unfair, and it’s all because I said I like Donald Trump.”  Mr. Webb grew up in a Mormon family in Elk Ridge, Utah, a community outside the conservative city of Provo. Though it is a safe place, and though Utah is humming along with 3.4 percent unemployment, Mr. Webb said he felt creeping fears about the threat of terrorism after attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., and Orlando, Fla.  He worried the American economy would not have a stable job for him. He hopes to become a police officer, and he worried that Mrs. Clinton would pass gun restrictions that could disarm law enforcement. Mr. Trump, he said, was a balm for those fears.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Supporters like Jeanne Koval, 57, and her husband, Alan, 59, see themselves as part of a global movement against corrupt governments run by insiders. The couple, who hail from Fenton, Mich., were playing the slots on the Las Vegas Strip on Tuesday night.  Ms. Koval, a nurse, compared her support for Mr. Trump to the support that the Filipino nurses she works with have shown for the president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte.  “They were tired of the corruption, and they want someone who can get something done,” she said.  Neither could specifically say what change they wanted Mr. Trump to make, but they voiced concern about rising health care costs and jobs going overseas. Ms. Koval said her parents’ health care premiums recently increased $600 a month.  In Utah, Olivia Blackham, who was adopted from Guatemala as a baby, voted for Mr. Trump in her first presidential election.  She did so in large part because, she said, she believed America’s immigration system was broken.  Ms. Blackham said she had been frustrated after working with refugees who received free health care while her middle-class friends and family had to pay high premiums and hundreds of dollars for prescriptions. She said she believed Mr. Trump could fix that.  “I’m really passionate about getting it straight,” she said.  But as the reality set in that Mr. Trump would become the 45th president of the United States, Ms. Blackham, 34, expressed a lingering uneasiness.  “I think it’s going to be scary,” Ms. Blackham said. “We’re in for a change.”
A Gallup poll in October found nationwide support for legalization at 60 percent, the highest level in the 47 years the organization has tracked the issue. Support is rising even though some public health experts warn that there have been insufficient studies of the drug’s effects, and that law enforcement agencies lack reliable tests and protocols to determine whether a driver is impaired by marijuana.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Supporters in California portrayed legalization as both a social justice and a criminal justice issue, saying the measure would help redress the disproportionate numbers of arrests and convictions among minorities for drug crimes.  A bill to legalize marijuana in Vermont, supported by Gov. Peter Shumlin, a Democrat, failed this year. But in Massachusetts, public support for legalization rose during the fall, even with bipartisan opposition from the state’s top elected officials and an organized anti-legalization campaign.  In addition to Tuesday’s votes on recreational marijuana, Arkansas, Florida, Montana and North Dakota all passed medical marijuana initiatives.  Among the other major ballot measures:  Massachusetts Rejects Charter School Expansion  Voters in Massachusetts easily turned aside a $26 million effort to increase the number of charter schools, delivering a blow to that movement and a victory for the unions that spent heavily trying to defeat it.  “We held the line,” said Barbara Madeloni, the president of the state’s largest teachers’ union, the Massachusetts Teachers Association. She added, “Money can’t buy our public schools.”  The initiative, which would have allowed up to 12 new charter schools to open in the state each year, became the most hotly contested election issue in deeply Democratic Massachusetts, with spending on the question shattering state records as the campaign turned into a pitched battle over the role of charter schools and unions in the public school system.  There was little dispute from either side that the existing 78 charter schools had performed well. But the state caps how much money communities can send to charter schools, and nine communities, including Boston, have hit the cap or can open only one more school, and thus have long wait lists. The battle turned to the question of equality: Would creating more charters help close the achievement gap for minority children in those cities? Or would it drain money from traditional public schools and create a tiered education system?  Opponents spent about $15 million trying to defeat the initiative, hoping to show that unions in Massachusetts still have the clout to stop the charter movement, which has expanded rapidly in other parts of the country.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  JESS BIDGOOD  Four States Approve Higher Minimum Wages  Voters in four states — Arizona, Colorado, Maine and Washington — approved initiatives to increase minimum wages, furthering a national trend toward greater compensation and benefits for the country’s lowest-paid workers.  The proposals that were approved will elevate the states’ wage floors to amounts ranging from $12 to $13.50 an hour by 2020. Voters in a fifth state, South Dakota, rejected, by a large margin, a measure to exclude teenage workers from an across-the-board increase that passed in 2014.  Since 2009, when Congress passed the current floor of $7.25 an hour, President Obama has struggled to rally support for increasing the federal minimum wage. State and local governments have taken on the matter themselves; 18 states have increased their wage floors since 2013, as have dozens of cities, including Santa Fe, N.M., and Lexington, Ky.  Supporters say that higher minimum wages, which often go to big-box-store employees and entry-level government workers, allow for more spending, stimulating economies. Opponents say that mandatory increases stymie job creation and leave fewer work opportunities available to those who lack skills and higher education.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Minimum wages vary widely across the country. Washington, D.C., has a higher floor than any state, at $11.50 an hour, while five states with no minimum wages — Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina and Tennessee — are held to the lower federal limit.  In all of the states that voted on wage increases this year, supporters far outspent their competition. In Arizona, the campaign favoring the wage increase spent $3 million to opponents’ $26,000, according to the latest financial disclosures.  CAITLIN DICKERSON  Carbon Tax Initiative Fails in Washington State  Washington turned down a measure intended to make the state the first in the nation to place a tax on carbon emissions.  State revenue would not have increased if the tax had been approved. Instead, the money generated would have been offset by reductions in other taxes; the state sales tax would have decreased to 5.5 percent, from 6.5 percent, for example.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Supporters argued that residents were morally obligated to combat climate change. Opponents said the tax would hurt residents by increasing gasoline and electricity costs.  JULIE TURKEWITZ  California Moves to Stiffen Gun and Ammunition Laws  Voters in California, which already has some of the country’s toughest gun laws, passed an initiative tightening them a bit further.  California — one of four states, along with Maine, Nevada and Washington, that were considering gun-related measures — will require those buying ammunition to complete a background check and to obtain authorization from the state’s Justice Department; ammunition would have to be bought from licensed dealers. The initiative also bans large-capacity magazines for firearms, extending previously passed restrictions on the ownership of such magazines.  Voters in Washington State overwhelmingly passed an initiative that will allow courts to issue “extreme risk protection orders” that would prevent the people named in such orders from owning or obtaining firearms if they were deemed at risk of harming themselves or others.  In Maine, voters rejected a proposal to more tightly regulate gun purchases by extending the requirement for background checks to most private sales of guns.  Nevada voters, however, narrowly approved a proposal similar to Maine’s, requiring most private buyers and sellers to conduct a background check through a licensed gun dealer.  JOHN SCHWARTZ  Colorado Forcefully Denies Single-Payer Health Plan  Voters overwhelmingly rejected a proposed amendment that would have made Colorado the first state in the nation to adopt a single-payer health insurance plan covering all residents.  Proponents said the plan, called ColoradoCare, would have closed coverage gaps and saved billions of dollars by reducing bureaucracy. Opponents said the plan was too vague and the program too costly to work. An independent analysis conducted by the Colorado Health Institute said the state could come up $8 billion short in annual revenue by the program’s 10th year.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  JULIE TURKEWITZ  End-of-Life Measure Is Passed in Colorado  Colorado voters accepted a proposition that would allow terminally ill people to take their own lives using medication prescribed by a doctor.  Proponents argued that the measure would expand options for people facing painful deaths. Opponents said the proposition was morally wrong and deeply flawed because it lacked safeguards against abuse by patients, doctors and insurance companies. JULIE TURKEWITZ  Nebraska and Oklahoma Back the Death Penalty  Voters in Nebraska, one of three states considering a total of four death-penalty initiatives, brought back capital punishment with Referendum 426, which repealed a bill passed by the Legislature in 2015 that ended the death penalty in the state.  In Oklahoma, voters protected the state’s death-penalty procedures. The state, the first to develop the lethal injection protocol, was challenged on the constitutionality of its methods after a botched execution. The referendum will prevent the death penalty from being declared cruel or unusual punishment under the state’s Constitution.  California, which has 741 people awaiting execution, considered two conflicting proposals: one that would have done away with the death penalty and another that would have sped up the process of executing those on death row.  Voters rejected Proposition 62, which would have ended the death penalty and set the strongest punishment available under California law as life without the possibility of parole.  Residents, however, were leaning in favor of the other measure, Proposition 66, although the margin was razor thin and the race remained too close to call on Wednesday afternoon. That measure was intended to eliminate obstacles to carrying out the death penalty and shorten the time between conviction and execution. JOHN SCHWARTZ
Mr. Trump, who appeared nervous and uncharacteristically subdued beside Mr. Obama, called the president “a good man.” He said that the meeting was “a great honor” and that their conversation had lasted far longer than he would have expected.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I have great respect,” Mr. Trump said, turning to face Mr. Obama. “We discussed a lot of different situations, some wonderful, and some difficulties. I very much look forward to dealing with the president in the future, including counsel.” Given that Mr. Trump has never held elective office or served in government, some administration aides suggest that Mr. Obama could play a larger-than-usual role in acquainting Mr. Trump with the demands of the office.  “The meeting might’ve been at least a little less awkward than some might have expected,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said. Aides said that the two men discussed foreign and domestic policy issues that Mr. Trump would need to deal with on Day 1 in the Oval Office. As early as Friday, the president-elect will get a version of the President’s Daily Brief, a classified compilation of all threats facing the United States and other highly significant intelligence information.  Photo  Mr. Trump’s trip was surreal for many Republicans and Democrats in Washington, who never expected to see the real estate executive and reality television star in an Oval Office meeting to begin preparations to lead the most powerful nation in the world. Mr. Trump, whose campaign drew support from white supremacist groups, sat just in front of a bust of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the Oval Office.  Outside in the Rose Garden, reporters could see Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, emerge from the West Wing talking in hushed tones with Jared Kushner, the president-elect’s son-in-law and adviser. The two then headed off for a stroll around the South Lawn. Nearby, aides to Mr. Trump snapped photographs of one another in the White House colonnade, standing in the spot where a crowd of shocked White House aides, some openly crying, had watched the day before as Mr. Obama called for national unity after Mr. Trump’s victory.  The Oval Office meeting was the centerpiece of a marathon day in the capital for Mr. Trump, his first since winning the presidency. His wife, Melania, had tea with Michelle Obama in the White House residence and took in the view of the Washington Monument from the Truman Balcony. White House aides said the two women talked about raising children in the White House.  “We want to make sure that they feel welcome as they prepare to make this transition,” Mr. Obama said of the Trumps.  Later on Capitol Hill, after meeting with Republican congressional leaders who will hold sway over enacting his agenda, Mr. Trump strode with Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the House speaker, to a balcony overlooking the platform on the west side of the Capitol where he will be sworn in on Jan. 20, 2017, peering out to the National Mall below.  “Really, really beautiful,” he said of the view.  The president-elect arrived in the late morning from New York at Reagan National Airport in his trademark jet with the name Trump emblazoned on its side, and then rode with his wife in a black, armored sport utility vehicle in a motorcade that moved swiftly through Washington. By midafternoon, crowds had gathered on a crisp autumn day on both sides of Pennsylvania Avenue next to the Trump International Hotel, where barricades were set up. Police officers were lined up on motorcycles, officers on horses patrolled the area, and tourists taking photographs mingled with camera crews.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump and his wife had lunch with Mr. Ryan at the Capitol Hill Club, a peace summit meeting after Mr. Ryan had offered tepid support for the Republican nominee during the campaign and Mr. Trump had branded him a “weak and ineffective leader,” threatening retribution.  Photo  Later, after a meeting in Mr. Ryan’s office in the Capitol, Mr. Trump said that he was excited to begin carrying out an agenda to address immigration, health care and tax cuts. Investors, apparently buoyed by the prospect of those tax cuts as well as increased infrastructure spending, sent the Dow Jones industrial average to a record high on Thursday.  “We’re going to do some absolutely spectacular things for the American people,” Mr. Trump said. “We’re going to lower taxes, as you know, we’re going to fix health care and make it more affordable and better. We’re going to do a real job for the public.”  Mr. Trump also met for about an hour with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader.  “We are looking at jobs,” Mr. Trump told reporters as he left. “Big-league jobs.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The meetings unfolded as members of Mr. Obama’s staff were starting the business of handing over the vast bureaucracy of the federal government to Mr. Trump’s staff. Speculation swirled over possible appointments in the Trump administration, with Stephen K. Bannon, the conservative provocateur and Mr. Trump’s campaign chief, and Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chairman, being mentioned as possible picks for chief of staff.  Top advisers to Mr. Obama have spent months preparing for the transition, a complex venture condensed into the 72 -days before the inauguration. It is up to them and the Trump team to set it in motion, pairing Obama administration staff members with representatives of the president-elect for crash courses in the workings of the White House and federal agencies.  Mr. Obama said Wednesday that he had instructed his staff to follow the example set by President George W. Bush in 2008 and provide a professional and smooth transition for Mr. Trump’s team, despite the policy differences that separate the president and his successor. For all the public drama and division of the presidential campaign, Mr. Obama’s aides have since July been quietly working with advisers to Hillary Clinton and Mr. Trump to plan for the passing of power.  But the crush of information may be onerous, particularly when it comes to Mr. Trump’s task of hiring 4,000 political appointees over a matter of weeks. Saddled with an antiquated personnel system when Mr. Obama was elected in 2008, his aides moved this year to build a new one designed to make it easier to track the positions, as well as the applicants and their personal and professional information.  In December, Mr. Obama’s team plans to hold the first of two war-gaming exercises to prepare Mr. Trump and his staff for a potential national security crisis. The second simulation for Mr. Trump is set for January, days before he officially gains access to the nuclear codes.
But if Mr. Trump makes good on his campaign promises, experts in climate change policy warn, that legacy would unravel quickly. The world, then, may have no way to avoid the most devastating consequences of global warming, including rising sea levels, extreme droughts and food shortages, and more powerful floods and storms.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has already vowed to “cancel” last year’s Paris climate agreement, which commits more than 190 countries to reduce their emissions of planet-warming carbon dioxide pollution, and to dismantle the Clean Power Plan, Mr. Obama’s domestic climate change regulations.  “If Trump steps back from that, it makes it much less likely that the world will ever meet that target, and essentially ensures we will head into the danger zone,” said Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences and international affairs at Princeton University and a member of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which produces global reports on the state of climate science.  Mr. Trump cannot legally block other countries from fulfilling their Paris agreement commitments, nor can he quickly or unilaterally erase Mr. Obama’s climate rules.  But he can, as president, choose not to carry out the Paris plan in the United States. And he could so substantially slow or weaken the enforcement of Mr. Obama’s rules that they would have little impact on reducing emissions in the United States, at least during Mr. Trump’s term.  That could doom the Paris agreement’s goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions enough to stave off an atmospheric warming of at least 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, the point at which, many scientists say, the planet will be locked into an irreversible future of extreme and dangerous warming.  Without the full participation of the United States, the world’s second-largest greenhouse gas polluter, after China, that goal is probably unattainable, even if every other country follows through on its pledges.  And, the experts say, without the participation of the United States, other governments are less likely to carry out their pledged emissions cuts.  “That target is already extremely difficult to achieve, but it could be done with very hard, very diligent work by every single country,” Mr. Oppenheimer said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The election of Mr. Trump is likely to cast a pall over Marrakesh, Morocco, where global negotiators have gathered for a 12-day conference to hash out the next steps for the Paris accord: how to verify commitments are being met, and how to pay for enforcement by poor countries that cannot afford the technology or energy disruptions.  Traveling in New Zealand, Secretary of State John Kerry was asked if he still planned to attend the conference, given the results of the election.  “I’m absolutely going to Marrakesh, perhaps even more important,” he said. “And I look forward to being there very, very much.”  Pessimism appears to be warranted. Mr. Oppenheimer and other climate policy experts said all major emitters needed to take action in the near term to stave off the 3.6-degree increase.  Scientific reports released over the last two years have concluded that the measurable warming of the planet because of human activities has already begun. This year is on track to be the hottest on record, blasting past the previous records set in 2015 and 2014.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  An analysis by Climate Interactive, a scientific think tank that provides data used by many governments, concluded that the policies by the United States would account for about 20 percent of the expected greenhouse gas reductions under the Paris plan from 2016 to 2030. But absent the expected policy actions in the United States under the Trump administration, scientists at Climate Interactive said, the math of emissions reductions will be much more difficult to maintain.  “Pessimists will find abundant support for despair this morning,” John Sterman, a professor of system dynamics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wrote in a Climate Interactive analysis on Wednesday morning.  “With Mr. Trump in the Oval Office and Republican majorities in both houses,” Mr. Sterman wrote, “there is little hope that the Clean Power Plan will survive in the Supreme Court or for federal action to meet the U.S. commitment under the Paris accord. Worse, other key emitter nations — especially India — now have little reason to follow through on their Paris pledges: If the U.S. won’t, why should developing nations cut their emissions?”  The Clean Power Plan is the ambitious centerpiece of Mr. Obama’s climate change legacy and the key to his commitment under the Paris accord. At its heart is a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations intended to curb planet-warming pollution from coal-fired power plants. If enacted, the rules could transform the American electricity sector, close hundreds of coal-fired plants and usher in the construction of vast new wind and solar farms. The plan is projected to cut United States power plant emissions 32 percent from 2005 levels by 2030.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the program is currently under litigation by 28 states and more than 100 companies, and it is expected to go before the Supreme Court as early as next year.  More Reporting on Climate Change  Mr. Trump and other Republicans have attacked the Clean Power Plan as a “war on coal.” As president, Mr. Trump would not have the legal authority to unilaterally undo the regulations, which were put forth by the E.P.A. under a provision of the 1970 Clean Air Act.  However, Mr. Trump could target the rules by appointing an industry-friendly justice to the Supreme Court and then refusing to defend the plan when it goes before the court.  He could also direct the E.P.A. to reissue the plan to be extremely friendly to industry. Such a move would also be subject to lawsuits by environmental advocates, which would further drag out the process. And in concert with congressional Republicans, he could decimate the E.P.A.’s budget, crippling its rule-making capacity.  “They may still have to have a regulation, but they don’t have to do it the way the Obama administration did it,” said Jeff Holmstead, a former E.P.A. official in the George W. Bush administration. “And in the meantime, those suits often go on for years and years.”  Even if Mr. Trump ultimately fails to gut Mr. Obama’s climate change rules, he could ensure that their enforcement is delayed through his term, as lawsuits wind their way through the courts.  Mr. Trump would face difficulties in his plans to eliminate the E.P.A., although it is likely he could substantively reduce its size. He would need approval from Congress to completely erase the agency, said Jody Freeman, a professor of environmental law at Harvard University and a former counselor to Mr. Obama.  Ms. Freeman noted that several major environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act, specifically call for rules to be enacted and overseen by the E.P.A. Changing those decades-old rules would also require action from Congress, and Senate Democrats would certainly block such efforts — unless Senate Republican leaders opt to scuttle what is left of filibuster rules already weakened by Democrats.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In China, the world’s largest greenhouse gas polluter, climate change officials said they intended to continue with plans to cut carbon emissions regardless of Mr. Trump’s plans. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has vowed under the Paris agreement that Chinese emissions will drop after 2030, and that China will put in place a national system next year to force companies to pay a fee for their carbon pollution.  “China’s attitude toward low-carbon development, as President Xi Jinping has said when he met with Secretary of State Kerry earlier, is that tackling climate change is not something anybody asks us to do,” Chai Qimin, a Chinese negotiator, said in an emailed response from the Marrakesh talks. “It’s what we want to do.”  But in India, the world’s third-largest greenhouse gas polluter, the election of Mr. Trump has raised doubts about a willingness to move forward. Under the Obama administration, Hillary Clinton, then secretary of state, pledged that rich countries would mobilize $100 billion annually by 2020 to help poor countries make the transition to cleaner forms of energy. Indian officials have made clear that their steps to cut emissions will depend on financial aid from rich countries, but Mr. Trump has also vowed to cut all “global warming payments.”  “I think most certainly it will affect the momentum in negotiations because it throws up a lot of questions,” said Arunabha Ghosh, chief executive of the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, a New Delhi policy group.  “The chances of public funds coming from climate finance are much more dismal now,” he said. “Right now I don’t feel very optimistic.”
“Never Trump” has become “Maybe Trump.” But whether he would have them is another matter.  Mr. Trump, a man known to nurse grudges long after doing so is beneficial, has boasted for months that he has a better understanding of how to best serve the nation’s security interests than nearly anyone who has made policy in the area for the past decade. At the same time, his transition team faces the daunting task of filling hundreds of jobs in a constellation of national security agencies.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At stake is more than a parlor game about who gets what job. Personnel decisions by Mr. Trump and his team will help determine both the course of the administration’s foreign policy and whether the president-elect will hew to the themes of his campaign — a suspicion of alliances, skepticism of foreign intervention and admiration for authoritarian figures like President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Some of these views have been embraced by some of Mr. Trump’s current advisers, including Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general and the former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency.  Such positions are generally anathema in Republican foreign policy circles largely dominated by hawkish former George W. Bush administration officials — from Eliot A. Cohen, a former State Department official, to Stephen J. Hadley, Mr. Bush’s national security adviser.  There is some common ground, particularly on counterterrorism policy. For instance, Mr. Trump has repeatedly praised the brutal interrogation methods the Bush administration used against Qaeda suspects, including waterboarding. “Torture works,” Mr. Trump said during a campaign stop in February. Most former Bush administration officials insist that the methods, used by the C.I.A., did not constitute torture.  Since the election was resolved early Wednesday, there have been at least informal contacts between the two factions, according to several people in both camps who refused to be identified. One person who is helping Mr. Trump’s transition team said the group was already receiving résumés from former Republican officials, including some of the signers of two open letters this year excoriating Mr. Trump’s foreign policy views. At the same time, the transition team has also made unofficial overtures to some of the people who signed the two letters — one in March and the second in August.  For now, Mr. Trump is relying on a small circle of advisers to begin considering candidates for national security positions. General Flynn openly disdains the views of many in the Republican national security establishment, especially those who served in senior positions during the George W. Bush administration. It was these people, he said during an interview shortly before the election, who helped push the United States into “too many conflicts that just seem too perpetual.”  “Mr. Trump, that’s what he wants to change,” he said.  People close to Mr. Trump’s team said that view did not seem to have changed significantly since Election Day. Representative Devin Nunes, the California Republican who is the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, has spoken to General Flynn, and he said the transition team seemed to be focused on filling the administration with many retired military officers and intelligence analysts who had operational roles in Iraq and Afghanistan.  “There’s no shortage of folks who have fought in war zones and were in the I.C. and are now out who are capable,” Mr. Nunes said, using an abbreviation for the intelligence community.  He also suggested that the transition team would not look kindly on those who once opposed Mr. Trump — people he referred to as the “elites” of the “Acela corridor” between Washington and New York.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “A lot of people never thought he would win the nomination, and a lot of people thought he would not win the presidency,” Mr. Nunes said. “And a lot of these people are not in a position to be in the next administration, and that’s refreshing.”  William Inboden, who worked at the National Security Council for President George W. Bush and was one of 50 people to sign the August letter, said he would not completely rule out working in a Trump administration.  “Any patriotic American who is asked to serve our country should be willing to do so and should give serious consideration to whatever position is offered,” said Mr. Inboden, who is now a professor at the University of Texas.  At the same time, he said, “the Trump team will have to decide how magnanimous they want to be toward the dissenters.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mary Beth Long, a former C.I.A. officer and assistant secretary of defense in the George W. Bush administration and another signer of the August letter, said she reversed her position on Mr. Trump at a campaign rally in Charlotte, N.C., about a month ago.  She said in an interview that she changed her views because she thought Mr. Trump and his campaign had “matured” over the past several months. She said that she was not seeking a job in the new administration nor expecting to be asked.  Ms. Long said that if experienced, respected Republican national security figures like Mr. Hadley, George W. Bush’s former national security adviser, were offered top jobs, and accepted them, it would provide cover and comfort to other Republicans who might otherwise balk at joining the Trump team.  Mr. Hadley, in a brief interview on Thursday, declined to comment on the speculation about his being a candidate for defense secretary or another top job in the Trump administration.  The March letter, coordinated by Mr. Cohen, the former State Department official, called Mr. Trump’s vision of American influence and power in the world “wildly inconsistent and unmoored in principle,” swinging “from isolationism to military adventurism within the space of one sentence.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  It was signed by 122 people.  Mr. Cohen said he did not expect to work for Mr. Trump. “People like me will not be asked to serve,” he said. While he stopped short of ruling it out, on the grounds of “you never rule out something that a president asks you to do,” he added: “It won’t happen to me, and I don’t want it to.”  Peter Feaver, a former George W. Bush administration official who teaches at Duke University, said he believed that the Trump administration would probably blacklist the signers. “That was the price people believed they were paying when they signed those letters,” he said.  Mr. Feaver said that even if the administration excluded everyone on both letters, there would still be an adequate pool of Republican foreign policy experts from which to choose. He also said the administration could quietly consult people who are blacklisted but who have particular expertise on a specific subject.  But Omarosa Manigault, the Trump campaign’s director of African-American outreach and a contestant on one of the early seasons of Mr. Trump’s reality show, “The Apprentice,” said at his election night party that the campaign is keeping an “enemies” list.  “It’s so great our enemies are making themselves clear so that when we get into the White House, we know where we stand,” she told the Independent Journal Review. Ms. Manigault was referring to Senator Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina Republican and a vocal critic of Mr. Trump, but several of the “Never Trump” former officials made reference to her comments in interviews over the past two days.  A big question for some is how much Mr. Trump intends to conduct a foreign policy that mirrors his campaign talk. On Wednesday, Mr. Trump reportedly reassured President Park Geun-hye of South Korea in a telephone call that he would maintain America’s security commitment to Seoul. During an interview with The New York Times in March, he had said that both South Korea and Japan needed to pay far more of the cost of stationing troops in those countries, or he would consider withdrawing them.  “We will be steadfast and strong with respect to working with you to protect against the instability in North Korea,” Mr. Trump said, according to a statement from Ms. Park’s office.  Eric Edelman, a former top aide to Vice President Dick Cheney and a former Pentagon official, has repeatedly criticized Mr. Trump’s fitness to be president. He said he could not imagine the Trump team calling him, and he said he would not serve if asked.  But Mr. Edelman, 65, said he had counseled many younger Republican former security officials to keep an open mind — especially if they fear that it could be years before they have another chance to get a job in a Republican administration.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “People in my position can’t pass moral judgment on younger colleagues,” he said.
[Female Clinton Supporters Are Left Feeling Gutted]  In interviews here in the Lehigh Valley — a bellwether region in a swing state that helped elect Mr. Trump — and around the country, female supporters said theirs was a vote for Mr. Trump and not against Hillary Clinton. America was on the wrong track, the women said, and Mr. Trump alone could fix it.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They are women who want their daughters to grow up and run businesses — and who run businesses themselves. Many said they were eager for a woman as president. Were they offended by Mr. Trump’s vile comments about women, captured on tape? Absolutely. Did they believe the women who came forward and said Mr. Trump had groped them? Not necessarily. Did any of it stop them from voting for him? No.  Where female opponents took to Twitter with #NotOkay, branding Mr. Trump a misogynist and worse, his female supporters saw “a good man and a good father,” said Mary Barket, the head of the Pennsylvania Federation of Republican Women, who knows Ms. Biro from church and helped her get involved in the Trump campaign.  Ms. Biro, who said she was “a quiet, reserved person,” had never knocked on doors or worked in politics before. But she spent one day each weekend since August canvassing for Mr. Trump.  Photo  Where those who voted against Mr. Trump saw someone who bankrupted businesses and ducked paying taxes, these women said they saw a man who built a real estate empire and simply followed the law. They saw a man who had raised and promoted a beautiful and successful daughter, Ivanka, and who let a smart and accomplished Washington strategist, Kellyanne Conway, manage his presidential campaign.  In short, they embraced Mr. Trump’s sales pitch for himself.  “I think that women see the big picture — women are smart,” Mrs. Gauta said. “The fact that he said something crude,” she said “is not going to change my mind about the good he can do for our country.  “Did I like that, no,” she went on. “But do I think he can do a better job than Hillary? Absolutely. I think he has got the best interests of this country at heart. He’s got a beautiful family; he wants to leave a nice country — the great country he was raised in — for his kids. And I think he said the only way I’m going to get that done is by being president myself.”  She took her sons, 14 and 16, to a Trump rally, and said she “was even more impressed by him in person than on TV.” But as to his sometimes foul mouth, “If my boys ever said anything like that, I’d put them over my knee and spank them.’’  In Chicago, Nicole Been, 22, a Roman Catholic who attends DePaul University, is deeply opposed to abortion and the “hookup culture.” She complained that other students branded her a racist and a bigot for supporting Mr. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In Philadelphia, Daphne Goggins, 53, an African-American community activist and ardent Republican, always knew she would vote for Mr. Trump. She said she believed decades of Democratic efforts had done little for black people. When Mr. Trump invited her to a minority outreach meeting, she told him tearfully that “for the first time in my life, I feel like my vote is going to count.” (Only 4 percent of black women, exit polls show, supported Mr. Trump, while 26 percent of Latinas did.)  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  For the women interviewed, as for male Trump backers, the economy was of utmost concern. Mrs. Gauta and her husband are tired of paying $1,800 a month in health care premiums, with a $12,000 annual deductible. Ms. Lincoln, the retired college administrator, now works at her husband’s auto body shop in Old Town, Me., to help pay the bills.  Ms. Ostendorf, the graphics producer in Los Angeles, watched her father’s million-dollar business implode in the economic crash of 2008. He picked up work doing maintenance for the Y.M.C.A.  “I’ve seen America fall down,” she said, “and a big part of Trump that appealed to me was his business plan.”  Photo  And they said they are troubled, as well, by an America that seems to have embraced multiculturalism and political correctness without question. They said they did not understand the Black Lives Matter movement, wondered why Democrats seemed so fixated on transgender access to bathrooms and tended to be enraged at the way veterans are treated and violence directed at the police.  They are concerned about immigration and the threat of terrorism.  Bobbye Horton, 67, of Grand Junction, Colo., who is Hispanic, approved of Mr. Trump’s plan to build a wall with Mexico. On Wednesday she wore a “Viva Trump” T-shirt. Immigrants, she said, needed to use legal channels or stay out. “He got at the heart of America.”  Research suggests Americans in both parties long ago became open to a female president. By 1999, the Gallup poll found that 92 percent of Americans said they would vote for a woman. When Gallup first asked that question, in 1937, the figure was 33 percent.  “People no longer hear, ‘Do you want a woman to be president?’” Ms. Conway said in an interview in February, before she became Mr. Trump’s campaign manager. “They hear, ‘Do you want that woman?’”  This held true in many conversations with Mr. Trump’s female supporters. Many said they simply avoided talking about voting for him with Democratic female friends, for fear it would damage their sisterly bonds. (Ms. Biro never speaks of politics at yoga or at work.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “When I told them that I was supporting Trump, they were, like, shocked, oh my gosh, ‘there is no way I could support him,’” Ms. Biro said of her friends. “But I was like, ‘Everybody has their thing.’”  Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster, said the party had expected “a surge of women” to support Mrs. Clinton, but that did not happen. While Mrs. Clinton did better with women in almost every demographic group, Ms. Lake said, “Trump won very solidly the white women’s vote, and we know that was fed by white, blue-collar women.”  Ms. Biro comes close to fitting that mold; although she considers herself middle class, she did not go to college. And Nazareth, a middle-class community in Northampton County, is the kind of community where Mr. Trump did well.  Yet sitting in the kitchen of her tidy Cape Cod-style home here, with the Trump-Pence signs still stuck in the front yard and a poster that speaks of peace as a path to enlightenment on the living room wall, Ms. Biro expressed the same hopes and fears for the country that many of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters now have.  “Hopefully he’s going to try to unite people,” she said of the president-elect. “We have to try to help people heal, so people can learn to trust, and have faith that things are going to be O.K.”
The shock they feel that a man whom they describe as sexist, misogynistic and boorish was elected has overshadowed some of their grief about Mrs. Clinton’s loss. Like so many of the other rivals in his path, they say, the most famous woman in the world has been reduced to one more piece of collateral damage.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And these feelings have morphed into a genuine sense of foreboding.  “I woke up in a strange country,” said Jill Laurie Goodman, a lawyer who lives on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. “I’m about Hillary’s age. I went to law school about the same time she did, coming out of the antiwar and civil rights movement.”  She had believed that society was moving forward, Ms. Goodman said. And yet, “I woke up yesterday feeling as if everything I thought 45 years ago was wrong, that I had just gotten it wrong.”  In Berkeley, Calif., Hope Friedman, a 62-year-old retired nurse, said she was also stunned by the result.  “I was a big Hillary supporter, but I am not in love with Hillary the way I was with Obama,” she said of the president. “My motivation for being active in the campaign was much more about being terrified of a guy that says and does the things that Trump has said and does.”  As she described her reaction to Mr. Trump’s victory, she wept.  “It kind of felt like being punched in the stomach,” she said. “It feels like when you get a cancer diagnosis and you are sick to your stomach and you can’t believe it and your mind is spinning.”  Sally Waldron, 69, an adult educator here in Cambridge, finds that her sorrow is rooted more in the dread she feels about a man with attitudes like Mr. Trump’s becoming president than it is borne of Mrs. Clinton’s loss.  Photo  “Part of me thinks this should be about the first woman losing,” Ms. Waldron said as she watched her grandson play in a sandlot.  “I would have loved if she was the first woman president, but that’s not where the disappointment is for me,” she said. “The disappointment is in the values that won and what it means for lots of people.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Even in the more conservative South, Clinton supporters expressed the same kind of disappointment and dread.  “I’m horrified because I have two daughters,” Kelly Cobb, 40, said as she bought slices of cake near Emory University in Atlanta.  Ms. Cobb, a stay-at-home mother, said she believed that Mr. Trump had managed to define Mrs. Clinton in the public imagination as a criminal and that he had benefited from gender stereotypes.  “I think there’s huge disdain for her because she’s a woman, but she’s also been in politics for a long time,” said Ms. Cobb, who also said she was uncertain what Mrs. Clinton’s defeat signaled for other women seeking office.  “I don’t know if it’s Hillary Clinton and who she is, but I have to think it does have something to do with the fact that she’s a woman,” she said. “People are just unaccepting of that and judge her to a much higher standard than they would a white male.”  Jessica Leeds, one of the first women to allege that she had been groped by Mr. Trump, said she cried Tuesday night as the results came in. She said she was stunned to discover that large numbers of women had voted for Mr. Trump.  “Apparently they just dismissed it,” she said. “They bought the line that it was just locker room talk, that it didn’t matter.” And, she surmised, “there are a lot of women who couldn’t bring themselves to vote for a woman.”  Women did not turn out for Mrs. Clinton in the numbers that her campaign expected, said Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster. The electorate was 52 percent female, slightly lower than the normal 53 percent. She was strongly supported by white, college-educated women; black women; and Latina women, but white, blue-collar women and white, non-college-educated women sided heavily with Mr. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  [Women Who Voted for Trump Believed He Spoke for Them]  Her failed bid raises the question about whether Mrs. Clinton’s experience will discourage other women. Did she break a barrier, or did she inadvertently reveal how high that barrier is?  Women began entering government in bigger numbers in the 1970s, but any rush has stalled. The number of women in Congress is about 19 percent. Research has shown that women are such a minority in government not because they are less likely to win — they are just as likely, over all — but because they are so much less likely to run in the first place.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Political scientists say this so-called ambition gap is because women are less likely to be encouraged or recruited to run, underestimate their own abilities, assume they need to be more qualified than men and view politics as sexist.  Now, Mrs. Clinton’s loss may lend credence to those doubts.  “Because there was general consensus on both sides of the aisle that she was the most qualified presidential candidate we’ve ever seen, and she lost, it reinforces the notion that maybe it’s not even enough to be twice as good to get half as far,” said Jennifer L. Lawless, a professor of government at American University who studies gender and political ambition.  Caroline Elkins, 47, a professor of history at Harvard, said she was profoundly disappointed and could not separate the outcome from Mrs. Clinton’s gender.  “To think that gender wasn’t a factor would be ludicrous,” she said. “You’d be hard-pressed to find someone more qualified than Hillary Clinton, in my view, and yet she was scrutinized above and beyond any male candidate we’ve ever seen.”  That Mrs. Clinton’s flaws were “thrown into a hyperbolic relief,” she said, suggests that being highly qualified for the job was not enough, that a woman still has to be “twice as good and half as threatening” as a man to succeed.  Ms. Friedman, the retired nurse in Berkeley, who made phone calls on behalf of Mrs. Clinton, was convinced that gender was a factor.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I underestimated the level of misogyny in the country,” she said. “Which is surprising, because usually I see it where it’s not.” But during her calls, she was sometimes met with crude responses.  “I forget how much people hate women,” she said.  Mary Jane Judy, 35, a lawyer in Kansas City, Mo., said Mrs. Clinton lost more because of herself than because she is a woman.  “I think the baggage with her as Hillary Clinton over the course of the years was just stuff that people couldn’t get past,” she said. “I’ve heard people say, ‘Anybody but Hillary.’”  In Belfast, Me., Anita Zeno, an innkeeper on the pristine Atlantic Coast, knew Mrs. Clinton had flaws. But when she voted, she felt a rush.  “I was surprised at how good it felt to be voting for a woman,” said Ms. Zeno, 70.  But on Thursday, as Ms. Zeno examined the shallots in a farm store and cafe, her eyes welled with tears at the very mention of Mrs. Clinton’s defeat. She was worried about the country, the fate of the Affordable Care Act and climate change.  And one more thing.  “At my age, it’s now likely I’ll never see a woman elected president,” Ms. Zeno said. “And that really mattered to me.”
Republicans are entering the next Congress in a fighting stance, seeking to undo much of Mr. Obama’s legacy. And many of them say they are looking forward to sparring with Mr. Schumer after years of enduring spats between Mr. McConnell and Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the departing minority leader.  Photo  “The Senate is really like a family,” said Senator Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee. “And if the two leading members of the family have a sour relationship, it’s pretty hard on all of us.”  He added: “Chuck and Mitch have the opportunity to together be very strong leaders who can make a real difference in the Senate. They both value the Senate as the most important institution in the country for achieving big things. They both understand that this is a job that is very hard to get and very hard to do, and while they are there, it ought to amount to something good for the country.”  At the same time, Mr. Schumer may find himself with more in common with his fellow New Yorker in the White House than most expect. Both men have long talked about major spending on infrastructure, and both believe that American companies that move jobs overseas should face punishment.  But dealing with Republicans is only part of Mr. Schumer’s challenge. Senate Democrats will be largely cleaved into those facing re-election in two years — many from red states like Indiana, North Dakota and Montana — and a liberal flank empowered by the popularity of Ms. Warren and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.  The complexities of his new role, one in which listening is required as much as talking and self-interest has to give way to consensus, would have once seemed ill suited to Mr. Schumer.  “Most people don’t evolve,” said Howard Wolfson, the New York political operative who worked on Mr. Schumer’s first race for the Senate, in 1998. “He is someone who has, in ways that enable him to be more successful than he would have been. If you think about him circa 1998, he was very focused on press, somewhat parochial in his view of the world and very partisan. He has evolved into someone who is very focused on results rather than flash, and very much able and interested in working with the other party to get things done.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Schumer has also ceded the spotlight, on the Sunday shows and even on major legislation, to colleagues with more pressing political needs. He has even learned to work with Republicans, hammering out deals while riding a stationary bike in the Senate gym.  Photo  While still the same un-self-conscious, mildly dorky Brooklyn Chuck — he frequently answers his colleagues’ questions by singing lyrics from “Hamilton” and is not above picking up an errant lo mein noodle that has fallen into his shoes with chopsticks and popping it into his mouth — he is now also self-actualized Chuck.  “I’ve become comfortable with who I am,” Mr. Schumer said. “I was a kid from Brooklyn when I got here. I thought, ‘What are they going to think of me?’”  His first Washington housemates, Representatives Marty Russo of Illinois and George Miller and Leon E. Panetta of California, helped him. “They brought me into the house and taught me how to be a team player,” he said.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Schumer has ascended through a combination of his relentless work habits and his ability to raise vast amounts of money. His appetite for calling candidates, colleagues, donors and staff members on his laughably retro flip phone at all hours, and his willingness to attend fund-raisers in far-flung places like Skaneateles, N.Y., on a Friday night, have earned him a rare kind of admiration.  “We like to say Schumer is a verb,” said Senator Bob Casey, Democrat of Pennsylvania.  In 2010, after Democrats maintained control of the Senate, defying the Tea Party wave that swamped the House, Mr. Reid created a leadership position for Mr. Schumer as a reward. Mr. Schumer seized that platform to build a war room for both policy and politics, building up many deposits in his favor bank, particularly from newer Senate Democrats who helped him lock up the top leadership slot as soon as Mr. Reid announced his retirement last year.  Even for members who opposed him, the way Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, did on earmarks, Mr. Schumer has shown understanding.  “Chuck disagreed with me, but one day he stopped me and said, ‘Listen, I know you feel strongly about this,’” she said. “‘If you feel you are getting trouble on this, just give me a holler, and I will block and tackle.’ That’s when it occurred to me he was paying attention to a lot of us, not just those that could raise money.”  Photo  Mr. Schumer, partisan but often not particularly liberal, has also forged bonds with Republicans like Mr. Alexander and Senator John Cornyn of Texas along the way. On the Judiciary Committee, he has worked with Mr. Cornyn to increase voting in the military and, most recently, on a bill to allow the families of the victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to sue Saudi Arabia.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Schumer’s greater challenge may be across the Rotunda. He is hopeful that he and the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, will bond over their love of tax policy. Both also support legislation to bring home hundreds of billions of dollars in corporate profits now parked overseas.  “Ryan and I already have a pretty good relationship,” he said.  Another open question is the degree to which Mr. Schumer will be able to maintain his hard-charging style as his responsibilities expand. Now, after Senate votes, the real work begins, as staff members pile into his office at assigned time slots until well after midnight to present an issue of the week. From a high-level official who is scheduled to testify on Capitol Hill, to remote maritime issues on Long Island, to the latest twist in a tax bill — all are discussed before Mr. Schumer, who cross-examines each messenger until he is satisfied.  Where did they get their information? What are the fine points of the policy? Which reporter should be clued in to the story?  Staff members vie for an early spot. The unlucky ones go home and make dinner and read their children “Harry Potter” before returning for a 10:30 p.m. grilling.  Mr. Schumer’s biggest leadership obstacle may be his hyper-preoccupation with New York. Racing to the Capitol off the last possible shuttle flight may no longer be an option. His biggest stand against the White House this year was when he pushed to override Mr. Obama’s veto of the Sept. 11 lawsuit bill, a hometown hit. He will have to balance the greater good of his members, many of them endangered moderates, with parochial interests.  “I’m from Brooklyn,” Mr. Schumer said. “Sometimes it helps me, sometimes it hurts me, but if I tried to be someone else, I’d be worse than whatever I am.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — Trent Lott, the former Republican senator from Mississippi, had gleefully flown back from Florida, where he had been working for the campaign of Donald J. Trump. Now a powerful lobbyist, his phone had been buzzing nonstop and he was busy helping to organize a briefing Thursday morning for dozens of corporate clients.  He was not alone. The stunning surprise of the election, and the political chaos it created, is a boon for Washington’s lobbying corridor known as K Street.  Corporate America is both excited and anxious about the prospect of Mr. Trump’s presidency, seeing great opportunity to shape the agenda after an extended period of frustration over gridlock in Congress.  With Republicans poised to control both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, Mr. Lott said he had not seen such a chance to help clients since he left the Senate in 2007 — whether by making changes to the federal tax code for Amazon or increasing military spending on new ships for Huntington Ingalls Industries.  “Trump has pledged to change things in Washington — about draining the swamp,” said Mr. Lott, who now works at Squire Patton Boggs, a law and lobbying firm. “He is going to need some people to help guide him through the swamp — how do you get in and how you get out? We are prepared to help do that.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Across Washington, lobbyists and trade association executives were busy reviewing their priorities, which include repealing financial regulations instituted during the Obama administration, pushing for cuts in corporate taxes, overhauling President Obama’s signature health care plan and spending billions on roads, bridges and other infrastructure.  “On these significant issues, now that you have one party controlling the executive branch and the legislature, it is more likely they will be addressed,” said Marc S. Lampkin, managing partner of the lobbying firm Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck, whose roster of more than 135 clients includes the drug maker AbbVie and the insurance company Zurich Financial Services.  Photo  Mr. Lampkin, a former Republican aide on Capitol Hill, had fielded so many phone calls on Wednesday from his clients that his voice had turned raspy with fatigue. “There is a lot of pent-up demand to break the gridlock in Washington,” he said.  Prominent Washington lobbyists also said that Mr. Trump would arrive in the capital with a much smaller contingent of veteran policy advisers than Hillary Clinton would have brought — and they see that relative inexperience as an opening. So they are prepared to draft legislation and regulations to quietly pass to allies on Capitol Hill and in the White House.  It is an opportunity that comes after a period of decline in lobbying revenues for many major firms. Total lobbying spending in Washington, after climbing consistently for nearly two decades began to dip in 2011, as congressional action slowed with divided government.  “Trump’s management style and policy approach to the campaign implies he is going to set big broad ‘beautiful’ direction and the elected lawmakers will take significant cuts at trying to flesh it out and reflect his will,” said Bruce P. Mehlman, the founder of Mehlman Castagnetti Rosen & Thomas, which has more than 70 clients ranging from Adobe, the software company, to Walmart.  Lobbyists will also be leveraging their relationships. Mr. Lott, for example, noted his longstanding friendship with Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, whose name has been mentioned as a possible secretary of defense, as well as his former aides like Rick Dearborn, a senior policy adviser to Mr. Trump, and David Hoppe, the chief of staff to Speaker Paul D. Ryan.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “There are going to be a lot of companies and people looking for guidance in how to deal with the legislative and executive branch,” Mr. Lott said. “I am looking forward to it.”  Republicans have pledged, if necessary, to repeal much of the Affordable Care Act or to pass changes in tax code using a process known as reconciliation that requires only a simple majority and not the 60 votes typically required for contentious matters, making the pitch for lobbyists somewhat easier.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Democrats will be needed for many measures, particularly in the Senate, which is why Steve Elmendorf, a Democratic lobbyist, said he was not worried about potential losses of clients.  Photo  “It is never good when you don’t control the administration or either body of Congress,” he said, having just returned from New York, where he went to what he had expected to be Mrs. Clinton’s victory party. “But as long as you have 60-vote thresholds in the Senate, you need members of the other party.”  Bruce Josten, the chief lobbyist at the United States Chamber of Commerce, said he had already been in communication with members of Mr. Trump’s transition team, as the chamber pushes its priorities like securing approval for the Keystone Pipeline, the oil pipeline project blocked by the Obama administration, or reopening more federal lands to oil and gas exploration.  “It is going to be nice to get back on game,” Mr. Josten said, who has spent 22 years running the government relations division at the United States Chamber, the nation’s single biggest spender on lobbying.  The chamber already knows there are certain items Mr. Trump has said he will not support, like the current versions of trade deals with Asia or comprehensive changes in the nation’s immigration laws, which the chamber pushed during Mr. Obama’s tenure. But there are aspects of each of these plans, like increasing the number of visas for highly skilled foreign workers, that Mr. Josten said he expects Mr. Trump to endorse.  Wall Street banks also will have to approach the Trump administration carefully — as Mr. Trump won the election in part by criticizing Mrs. Clinton’s ties to players there. But financial service lobbyists are eager to get moving.  People are rapidly “putting together lists of outdated, ineffective regulations that can be reversed by executive order or, if necessary, legislation,” said Sam K. Geduldig from CGCN Group, which has numerous financial sector clients. “This is their opportunity to undo regulations that have been shackling them.”  The first year of any new administration is traditionally a productive period. The challenge is for the corporate consultants to get their wish list included in the rush of action.  “The plate of issues that will be actively considered will be much larger in 2017 than we have seen in many years,” said Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, who works at BGR Group, a lobbying and public relations firm. “That will help a lot of companies and interests that have been waiting for a long time to be heard.”
“He doesn’t possess the executive power to reorganize the government at whim,” said Jody Freeman, a law professor at Harvard University who served in the first Obama administration. “There are some minor things presidents can do, in terms of creating new offices in cabinet agencies. But the notion that he can single-handedly abolish agencies is fanciful.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Energy and the Environment  Photo  The first indication of Mr. Trump’s intentions may come as he appoints members of his cabinet, sending signals about his priorities. Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican vice-presidential nominee, has expressed interest in running the Energy Department. In a CNN interview last year, she promised to dismantle it. “If I were in charge of that, it would be a short-term job,” she said.  Mr. Trump has also suggested a significant reshaping of the agency’s role, which includes oversight of the National Nuclear Security Administration and the nation’s nuclear arsenal. Mr. Trump has indicated that he would like the agency to focus chiefly on energy extraction, and some people close to him believe he may choose oil and gas magnate Harold Hamm to run it.  As Mr. Trump prepares to slam the brakes on President Obama’s climate change regulations and ramp up fossil fuel production, he has vowed to gut the Environmental Protection Agency. “We are going to get rid of it in almost every form,” he said.  That would be difficult. Mr. Trump would need an act of Congress to eliminate the agency entirely, Ms. Freeman said. The Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act include specific provisions that give the agency legal powers, and changing that would require action by Congress as well. “Any effort to interfere with that would immediately be challenged in court,” Ms. Freeman said.  Health and Education  Ditching the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Obama’s signature legislative achievement, is close to a certainty.  But not every part of the law can easily be overturned, and some of the initiatives that have changed the way the government pays for health care in the Medicare program are supported by Republicans. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation and the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, both deeply unpopular with congressional Republicans, will probably be eliminated.  Photo  “I imagine they’ll focus on getting rid of the individual and employer mandates, insurance marketplace requirements and Medicaid expansion,” said Lanhee J. Chen, a scholar at the Hoover Institution and a former policy adviser to Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican presidential nominee.  Within the government’s health agencies, Mr. Trump’s campaign also proposed eliminating the Food and Drug Administration’s “food police,” which it said “dictate how the federal government expects farmers to produce fruits and vegetables and even dictates the nutritional content of dog food.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the proposal was quickly taken down from the campaign’s website. The Food Safety Modernization Act of 2011, which strengthened the F.D.A.’s oversight of food, is popular among many Republicans as well as with food manufacturers, tarnished by massive food recalls.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Andy Roth, the vice president for government affairs at the Club for Growth, a conservative advocacy group, praised Mr. Trump’s comments on scaling back the Education Department. Mr. Trump has proposed sending $20 billion to the states for school choice programs.  “Bureaucrats in D.C. don’t know how to provide for an education like a parent can,” Mr. Roth said. But he said he is largely mystified about the president-elect’s plans. “Trump is a huge question mark,” he said. “And we honestly don’t know which way he is going go.”  Economy  The president-elect has vowed to double the nation’s rate of economic growth through a combination of broad tax cuts, new trade policies and smart deregulation.  Photo  But analysts say he is unlikely to undertake a major overhaul of the various government agencies that handle economic affairs, such as the Departments of Treasury, Commerce, Labor, Agriculture, Transportation and Housing. At the Treasury Department, the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, both created under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Protection Law, may have their wings clipped, since neither is popular with congressional Republicans.  “I think Dodd-Frank is the major reason the economy has not grown at the usual pace of recovery following a recession,” said Peter Wallison, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative Washington think tank.  A brief note this week on Mr. Trump’s transition website promised to “dismantle” Dodd-Frank — but few foresee an absolute overhaul since that would require ambitious legislative action in Congress. Even Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, signaled Wednesday that he intends to move cautiously.  Law Enforcement and National Security  Some conservatives may also be disappointed when it comes to Mr. Trump’s approach to the nation’s military and intelligence establishment. Mr. Trump lashed out during the campaign at Mr. Obama’s foreign policy, his handling of wars in the Middle East and the government’s effort on immigration. But the president-elect’s prescription for change is likely to result in more spending, not less.  Photo  Mr. Trump wants to root out waste and abuse at the Department of Defense, even as he calls for increasing the size of the Army to 540,000 active duty soldiers, increasing the Navy to 350 ships and providing the Air Force with 1,200 fighter jets. And he promises to pay for all of that with a “full audit” at the Pentagon that eliminates duplicative bureaucracy and ends unwanted programs.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But history suggests he will fail in any overhaul of military programs, said Amy Zegart, the co-director of the Center for International Security and Cooperation at Stanford University. She predicted that change would be opposed by legions of defense and intelligence bureaucrats, as well as powerful members of Congress whose turf would be threatened.  “Forging change will be much, much harder than he expects,” she said.  At the Justice Department, Mr. Obama significantly expanded efforts to investigate unconstitutional policing and demanded changes in police departments that have shown patterns of excessive force or other abuses. Mr. Trump has not said what changes he was considering but has declared that “the war on our police must end.”  A spokeswoman for the president-elect declined on Thursday to provide any information about Mr. Trump’s thinking about the size and shape of government. For now, conservative activists say they are unsure of what to expect from the new president-elect.  “I would hope that he would embrace some radical program terminations, but I’m not holding my breath,” said Chris Edwards, the editor of a blog for the Cato Institute on downsizing government. In a post on Thursday, Mr. Edwards called Mr. Trump “timid” and noted he had not pledged to eliminate subsidies for schools, farms, housing, energy and transit — cuts that conservatives crave.
Photo  In November 2000, as the Florida recount gripped the nation, a newly elected Democratic senator from New York took a break from an upstate victory tour to address the possibility that Al Gore could wind up winning the popular vote but losing the presidential election.  She was unequivocal. “I believe strongly that in a democracy, we should respect the will of the people,” Hillary Clinton said, “and to me that means it’s time to do away with the Electoral College and move to the popular election of our president.”  Sixteen years later, the Electoral College is still standing, and Mrs. Clinton has followed Mr. Gore as the second Democratic presidential candidate in modern history to be defeated by a Republican who earned fewer votes, in his case George W. Bush.  In her concession speech on Wednesday, Mrs. Clinton did not mention the popular vote, an omission that seemed to signal her desire to encourage a smooth and civil transition of power after a divisive election. But her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, highlighted her higher vote total than Donald J. Trump’s in introducing her.  The disparity left a bitter taste in the mouths of many Democrats, whose party won the country’s national popular vote for the third consecutive election but no longer controls any branch of government.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “If we really subscribe to the notion that ‘majority rules,’ then why do we deny the majority their chosen candidate?” asked Jennifer M. Granholm, a former governor of Michigan.  Mr. Trump himself has been critical of the Electoral College in the past. On the eve of the 2012 election, he called it “a disaster for a democracy” in a Twitter post. Now, after months of railing against what he called a “rigged” election, he has become the unlikely beneficiary of an electoral system that enables a candidate to win the race without winning over the most voters.  Photo  None of Mrs. Clinton’s supporters have gone so far as to suggest that the popular vote tally should delegitimize Mr. Trump’s victory, and the popular-vote margin in Tuesday’s election was in fact narrower than the one that separated Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore in 2000.  But the results are already renewing calls for electoral reform. “I personally would like to see the Electoral College eliminated entirely,” said David Boies, the lawyer who represented Mr. Gore in the Florida recount in 2000. “I think it’s a historical anomaly.”  Defenders of the system argue that it reduces the chances of daunting nationwide recounts in close races, a scenario that Gary L. Gregg II, an Electoral College expert at the University of Louisville, said would be a “national nightmare.”  A variety of factors informed the creation of the Electoral College, which apportions a fixed number of votes to each state based on the size of its congressional delegation. The founding fathers sought to ensure that residents in states with smaller populations were not ignored.  In an era that predated mass media and even political parties, the founders were also concerned that average Americans would lack enough information about the candidates to make intelligent choices. So informed “electors” would stand in for them.  Above all, some historians point to the critical role that slavery played in the formation of the system. Southern delegates to the 1787 Constitutional Convention, most prominently James Madison of Virginia, were concerned that their constituents would be outnumbered by Northerners. The Three-Fifths Compromise, however, allowed states to count each slave as three-fifths of a person — enough, at the time, to ensure a Southern majority in presidential races.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On social media Wednesday, some drew connections between that history and what they perceived as an imbalance in the Electoral College that favors Republicans.  “Electoral college will forever tip balance to rural/conservative/“white”/older voters — a concession to slave-holders originally,” the author Joyce Carol Oates wrote on Twitter.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  To its critics, the Electoral College is a relic that violates the democratic principle of one person, one vote, and distorts the presidential campaign by encouraging candidates to campaign only in the relatively small number of contested states.  “I think it is intolerable for democracy,” said George C. Edwards III, a political science professor at Texas A&M University and the author of a book on the Electoral College. “I can’t think of any justification for it, and any justification that is offered doesn’t bear scrutiny.”  But calls to change the system, which would require a constitutional amendment, are likely to fall on deaf ears with Republicans in control of both houses of Congress.  And though there was some momentum for reform after Mr. Gore’s defeat, it dissipated after Mr. Bush and Barack Obama won both the popular and electoral votes in 2004, 2008 and 2012.  Some states have discussed a possibility that would not necessarily require amending the Constitution: jettisoning the winner-take-all system, in which a single candidate is awarded all of a state’s electoral votes — regardless of the popular vote — and instead apportioning them to reflect the breakdown of each state’s popular vote. Two states, Maine and Nebraska, already do this.  But even that approach could face challenges, said Laurence H. Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  For reformers, the best hope may lie in the so-called National Popular Vote Interstate Compact, an agreement among states to award all of their respective electoral votes to the candidate who wins the popular vote in a given election.  So far, 10 states and the District of Columbia have joined the agreement. But it will only go into effect when enough states have signed on to guarantee that the winner of the popular vote would win an election.  For now, it seems, any change still remains a far-off notion.  “I am very mad at James Madison,” said former Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat. “But I don’t think there’s anything I can do about it.”
Photo  Aaron Schock, the former Republican representative from Illinois whose taste for first-class travel and a “Downton Abbey”-themed office design led to questions about his judgment and adherence to spending rules, was indicted on Thursday by a federal grand jury on 24 counts, including wire fraud and theft of government funds.  The indictment came after his lawyer, George J. Terwilliger III, said in a statement that the charges were expected and described them as a “misuse” of prosecutorial power by the Justice Department.  Photo  “This indictment will look bad, but underneath it is just made-up allegations of criminal activity arising from unintentional administrative errors,” Mr. Terwilliger said in an email. “These charges are the culmination of an effort to find something, anything, to take down Aaron Schock.”  Mr. Schock, who resigned his House seat in March 2015 amid a government inquiry, said in the statement, “I intend to not only prove these allegations false, but in the process, expose this investigation for what it was.”  “Neither I nor anyone else intentionally did anything wrong,” he added. “As I have said before, we might have made errors among a few of the thousands and thousands of financial transactions we conducted, but they were honest mistakes — no one intended to break any law.”  Photo  Mr. Schock was 27 years old when he began serving in Congress in January 2009. He became known for populating his Instagram account with adventurous photographs, showing him toting a rifle at West Point, surfing or glacier jumping in Patagonia.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ethics questions arose after The Washington Post reported on his opulent Capitol Hill office in February 2015, which prompted a government investigation into whether he had improperly accepted pro bono interior design services. Mr. Schock personally paid back $40,000 for office renovations, which included blood-red walls, a crystal chandelier and a plume of pheasant feathers.  A New York Times article last year described the office as being decorated like a drawing room from “Downton Abbey,” and said that with his “buff physique and natty wardrobe,” Mr. Schock had cultivated an image that was more about lifestyle and less about lawmaking.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Schock, now 35, resigned amid questions about his financial practices, including accusations of spending tens of thousands of dollars from taxpayer-funded accounts on office renovations, using taxpayer and campaign funds on private jets and concerts, and failing to report extravagant gifts on his annual financial disclosure forms as required by House ethics rules.  In addition to the wire fraud and theft of government funds charges, Mr. Schock was charged with making false statements, filing false federal income tax returns, falsification of Federal Election Commission filings and mail fraud.  The statement from his lawyer said that Mr. Schock had never “seen ‘Downton Abbey’ and did not request an office designed like it.”  It also said that he had repaid “every penny of taxpayer-funded mileage he ever received despite the fact that he indisputably drove tens of thousands of miles throughout his district on official business, one of the largest congressional districts in Illinois.”
PHOENIX — Donald J. Trump won Arizona’s presidential contest and its 11 electoral votes on Thursday after the latest count put him over the top, extending a long Republican winning streak in the conservative state.  Mr. Trump had a solid lead over Hillary Clinton on Election Day, but a winner was not declared because there were so many uncounted votes — over 600,000. The latest batch of returns tabulated on Thursday made him the clear winner. It marks a two-decade winning streak for Republican presidential candidates in Arizona. Bill Clinton was the last Democrat to take the state, in 1996. Before him, Harry S. Truman was the last Democrat to win here.  Mrs. Clinton was closer to gaining Arizona than President Obama, who lost by nine or more percentage points during his two runs for president. She was losing by four points. Arizona was one of three races that had yet to be determined from Tuesday’s election, with Michigan and New Hampshire still too close to call.  Mr. Trump made several swings through Arizona and capitalized on Republicans’ dislike of Mrs. Clinton and their frustration over illegal immigration, vowing to build a wall along the border. Sheriff Joe Arpaio and former Gov. Jan Brewer were some of his most vocal backers, especially on immigration issues. Gov. Doug Ducey was among those who introduced him at rallies and urged Arizonans to vote for him.  Mrs. Clinton sought to tap into frustrations among Latinos over Mr. Trump’s anti-immigration talk and a favorable ballot that included a minimum-wage increase and Mr. Arpaio’s bid for a seventh term as sheriff of Maricopa County, which includes Phoenix. Many Hispanics reviled the sheriff over his immigration raids. Paul Penzone, a Democrat, beat the longtime sheriff handily.
Photo  The election of Donald J. Trump to the presidency sent panic through much of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, which for the first time in eight years will face an administration hostile to its civil rights goals and a president-elect who has expressed a desire to reverse many of its political gains.  Jay Brown, a spokesman for the Human Rights Campaign, the nation’s largest gay rights organization, said its office had received calls throughout the day on Wednesday from frightened people who wanted to know what the election results might mean for them.  Some callers wondered if they should speed up wedding plans so they could be married before the inauguration, in case a President Trump tries to overturn gay marriage, he said. Others worried that the military would reinstate “don’t ask, don’t tell,” the ban on openly gay and lesbian service members that ended in 2011.  “This is a devastating loss for our community,” Mr. Brown said. “It is something a lot of folks are still trying to wrap their heads around.”  Mara Keisling, the executive director of the National Center for Transgender Equality, agreed. “All across America right now there are millions of people who are terrified,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has no reputation for personal animosity toward gay people, and the Log Cabin Republicans, a gay and lesbian political organization, congratulated him on his victory. He employed gay people in the Trump Organization, spent most of his life in socially liberal New York City, and surprised some Republicans this year when he said transgender people should “use the bathroom they feel is appropriate,” a view held by few others in the party.  But many L.G.B.T. leaders said they were unmoved by accounts of Mr. Trump’s personal tolerance.  “Even if people believe that about Trump, what is true is he will now be held to the G.O.P. platform,” said Rea Carey, the executive director of the National L.G.B.T.Q. Task Force. She called it the most anti-L.G.B.T. platform in recent memory.  Among its provisions: opposition to same-sex marriage, support for state laws limiting which public bathroom transgender people can use, and support for a parent’s right to subject gay and transgender children to “conversion therapy” to change their sexual orientation or gender identity, a practice the Obama administration has said should be banned for minors.  Ms. Carey called Mr. Trump’s public statements on gay and transgender issues “confusing and conflicting.” As a candidate, Mr. Trump told Fox News that he would “strongly consider” appointing Supreme Court justices who would overturn same-sex marriage but later in the campaign held a rainbow flag onstage and presented himself as gay friendly.  Mr. Trump has also promised to nullify all of Mr. Obama’s executive orders, including one that bans anti-L.G.B.T. discrimination by federal contractors and another that protects the rights of transgender students, she said.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Gay and transgender leaders said they were especially alarmed when Mr. Trump chose Mike Pence, who has a long record of opposition to gay rights, as his running mate.  “What we know about Mike Pence is that he led a direct, massive and concerted effort in the state of Indiana to deny equality to L.G.B.T. people,” Ms. Carey said. “It’s not like Trump didn’t know who he was.”  As governor of Indiana, Mr. Pence opposed gay marriage and signed into law a bill that made it legal for businesses to cite religious freedom when refusing service to gay and transgender people, for example a bakery that refused to bake a cake for a same-sex wedding.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As a member of Congress, Mr. Pence voted against employment nondiscrimination protections for gay and transgender people and also voted against the repeal of “don’t ask, don’t tell.”  His opposition to gay rights goes back at least to his first congressional campaign, in 2000, when he opposed same-sex marriage and the nondiscrimination laws that protected L.G.B.T. people.  He also argued for public funding of conversion therapy and said federal funding for H.I.V./AIDS treatment should be renewed only if the government could certify that no money went to “organizations that celebrate and encourage the types of behaviors that facilitate the spreading of the H.I.V. virus,” according to an archived version of his campaign website.  Mr. Brown called Mr. Pence “one of the most anti-L.G.B.T. politicians out there.”  The divisive nature of Mr. Trump’s campaign and his positions on immigration, Muslim Americans and women’s issues also posed a threat to large numbers of gay and transgender people, Mr. Brown said.  “There is an enormous amount of fear and concern over what a Trump presidency means for those of us who are also part of the immigrant community or Muslim community or who look, think and believe differently than the folks he will be putting in charge of our agencies and our government,” he said.  News that Mr. Trump would be the next president of the United States inspired an early wistfulness for the Obama administration among some leaders. Ms. Keisling called Mr. Obama “a remarkable president for transgender rights.”  But the struggle for gay and transgender rights would continue, she said, even if the political climate drastically changed. She said she had faith in “the strength and resilience of transgender people.”  "We are going to keep working to advance policy,” Ms. Keisling said. “We’re going to fight like hell to keep existing policies, and we are going to win more than we are going to lose.”
Video  WASHINGTON — In his otherwise shaky performance on Monday, Donald J. Trump had his best moments of the first presidential debate on the topic of trade — a defining one for the election — as he threw Hillary Clinton on the defensive over trade pacts past and present.  Mr. Trump, primed to pounce on the issue in their initial showdown, got his opening with the first question. His aggressiveness may have been offset somewhat by demerits on substance, but Mrs. Clinton rarely corrected his mistakes. And she struggled to counter his attacks on her, especially for once calling President Obama’s pending trade accord with 11 Pacific Rim nations the “gold standard” of trade agreements before turning against it as a presidential candidate.  “You were totally in favor of it. Then you heard what I was saying, how bad it is, and you said, ‘I can’t win that debate,’” Mr. Trump said, inaccurately claiming credit for a change of heart that had nothing to do with him.  That neither candidate came to the defense of trade and trade agreements underscored a remarkable feature of this presidential election: Both major parties’ nominees are running against such pacts, despite the long pro-trade tradition of the Republican Party, and Mrs. Clinton’s past endorsement of the signature trade agreements of her husband and her former boss, Mr. Obama.  Mrs. Clinton did offer qualified support: “We are 5 percent of the world’s population; we have to trade with the other 95 percent. And we need to have smart, fair trade deals.” No such acknowledgment came from Mr. Trump.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  His first words of the night were the claim that “our jobs are fleeing the country,” though nearly 15 million new jobs have been created since the economic recovery began. He singled out Ford for sending thousands of jobs to Mexico to build small cars and worsening manufacturing job losses in Michigan and Ohio, but the company’s chief executive has said “zero” American workers would be cut. Those states each gained more than 75,000 jobs in just the last year. Mr. Trump said China was devaluing its currency for unfair price advantages, yet it ended that practice several years ago and is now propping up the value of its currency.  But Mr. Trump made his most cutting claims directly against both Clintons, with Mrs. Clinton on stage standing beside him and President Bill Clinton in the front row.  Repeatedly he condemned the North American Free Trade Agreement, negotiated under President George H. W. Bush and championed through Congress by Mr. Clinton, calling it “the single worst trade deal ever approved in this country” and “one of the worst things that ever happened to the manufacturing industry.”  In reply — “Well, that’s your opinion,” she said — Mrs. Clinton declined to engage on the specific merits of Nafta, which for more than two decades has been widely counted as a main achievement of her husband. She noted generally that manufacturing jobs and personal incomes increased during his presidency, adding, “I think my husband did a pretty good job in the 1990s.”  While unions and others have long blamed Nafta for economic ills in manufacturing states, independent studies have found that on balance it had little economic impact — proving neither the boon that supporters predicted nor the disaster that opponents feared.  Mr. Trump spent more time slamming Nafta than he did attacking the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, which would effectively replace Nafta with new rules governing trade with Canada and Mexico as well as Japan, Vietnam, Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei, Australia, New Zealand, Chile and Peru. Mr. Obama is waging an uphill campaign for Congress’s approval, given the antitrade climate Mr. Trump has fostered.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As a political matter, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign’s concern was the challenge from Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, an antitrade liberal who had emerged as an unexpected threat. Mr. Trump all but certainly was not a factor; even many Republicans at the time dismissed his chances of becoming their nominee.  More accurately, Mr. Trump recalled that Mrs. Clinton called the accord “the gold standard” of trade deals. That was during Mr. Obama’s first term, when she was secretary of state and the accord was midway through years of negotiations.  “Well, Donald, I know you live in your own reality, but that is not the facts,” Mrs. Clinton said. “The facts are I did say I hoped it would be a good deal. But when it was negotiated, which I was not responsible for, I concluded it wasn’t.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  As secretary of state, however, Mrs. Clinton did not talk of what she “hoped” the deal would be. More than 40 times she hailed the accord without qualification.  Beyond economics, the accord was supposed to cement President Obama’s foreign policy “pivot” toward Asia, binding the United States to an alliance to counter the rising regional influence of China.  But days after the agreement’s conclusion in October, Mrs. Clinton announced that she had reversed her support. Then and since, she said the T.P.P. did not meet her tests for an acceptable trade agreement: creating jobs, raising wages or advancing national security.  Economists generally have said the Pacific nations agreement would increase incomes, exports and growth in the United States, but not significantly. The administration has argued that with the agreement, some low-skill jobs would be lost, but on balance more would be created, and in export-reliant industries that pay higher wages on average.  In the debate, Mrs. Clinton pointed out that, as a senator during the George W. Bush administration, she had voted against the seven-nation Central America Free Trade Agreement. She did support some bilateral trade agreements.  Mr. Trump, in arguing that the United States is “being ripped off” by other countries, wrongly cited an example regarding Mexico. He said its value-added tax, a sort of sales tax, amounts to a 16 percent tax on American imports, although Mexico’s exports into the United States face no such levy. But the tax, as in other nations with that tax system, applies to Mexico’s domestic as well as imported goods. Otherwise it would be a violation of international trade rules.  Mr. Trump repeatedly said he would stop American companies from leaving the country, but never said how. He also said inaccurately that the United States had a trade deficit of almost $800 billion a year with other nations. The deficit was about $500 billion last year, after accounting for a surplus in exports of services.
Photo  Donald J. Trump paid his former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski $20,000 in August for “strategy consulting,” two months after Mr. Lewandowski left the team and was hired by CNN as a commentator.  The payment, revealed in Federal Election Commission filings on Tuesday, was the second monthly consulting fee paid to Mr. Lewandowski through his consulting company since he left the Trump campaign and joined CNN, raising questions about whether the network in effect has a Trump campaign strategist on its payroll.  Mr. Lewandowski still speaks with Mr. Trump regularly. Reached by phone, Mr. Lewandowski said he could not comment because of his contractual obligations with CNN.  But Steven Cheung, a spokesman for Mr. Trump, said that the payments were actually severance payments owed to Mr. Lewandowski under his old contract with Mr. Trump’s campaign.  “Corey Lewandowski, who is no longer involved in the campaign, continues to receive monthly severance payments,” Mr. Cheung said. “The campaign will continue to honor its contract with Mr. Lewandowski, which stipulates he will be paid through the end of the year. These payments are in no way compensation for services rendered.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But on F.E.C. paperwork, the campaign listed both the August and July payments as “strategy consulting.” Mr. Cheung did not respond to a follow-up email about why the payments were not described to the F.E.C. as severance.  In July, when Donna Brazile, a CNN contributor, took over as interim chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee, the network suspended her contract.  Barbara Levin, a CNN spokeswoman, likewise said that the payments were severance and were disclosed to viewers whenever Mr. Lewandowski appeared.  “We disclose the severance payment publicly each time he is on our air,” Ms. Levin said.
But moments later, his resolve had collapsed. He allowed the same reporter onto his plane for a flight from Miami to Jacksonville, Fla.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In the final days of the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump’s candidacy is a jarring split screen: the choreographed show of calm and confidence orchestrated by his staff, and the neediness and vulnerability of a once-boastful candidate now uncertain of victory.  On the surface, there is the semblance of stability that is robbing Hillary Clinton of her most potent weapon: Mr. Trump’s self-sabotaging eruptions, which have repeatedly undermined his candidacy. Underneath that veneer, turbulence still reigns, making it difficult for him to overcome all of the obstacles blocking his path to the White House.  The contrasts pervade his campaign. Aides to Mr. Trump have finally wrested away the Twitter account that he used to colorfully — and often counterproductively — savage his rivals. But offline, Mr. Trump still privately muses about all the ways he will punish his enemies after Election Day, including a threat to fund a “super PAC” with vengeance as its core mission.  His polished older daughter, Ivanka, sat for a commercial intended to appeal to suburban women who have recoiled from her father’s incendiary language. But she discouraged the campaign from promoting the ad in news releases, fearing that her high-profile association with the campaign would damage the businesses that bear her name.  Video  Mr. Trump’s campaign is no longer making headlines with embarrassing staff shake-ups. But that has left him with a band of squabbling and unfireable advisers, with confusing roles and an inability to sign off on basic tasks. A plan to encourage early voting in Florida went unapproved for weeks.  The result is chaotic. Advisers cut loose from the campaign months ago, like Corey Lewandowski, still talk to the candidate frequently, offering advice that sometimes clashes with that of the current leadership team. Mr. Trump, who does not use a computer, rails against the campaign’s expenditure of tens of millions on digital ads, skeptical that spots he never sees could have any effect.  Not even staff members who volunteer to be dismissed are let go. The senior communications adviser, Jason Miller, offered to resign after he was spotted at a Las Vegas strip club the night before the final presidential debate. The offer was rejected.  This inside account of the Trump campaign’s final stretch is based on interviews with dozens of aides, operatives, supporters and advisers, many of whom were granted anonymity to describe moments and conversations that were intended to be confidential.    Photo  Hope Hicks, Mr. Trump’s spokeswoman, said the campaign was on course and gaining ground. She firmly rejected suggestions that advisers were clashing, and said voters were responding to Mr. Trump’s message.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Hicks denied that Ms. Trump had misgivings about promoting the ad in which she appeared. “That’s simply not true,” Ms. Hicks said. “Ivanka is totally supportive.”  Falling Into Despair  The closing phase of Mr. Trump’s campaign has been punctuated by swaying poll numbers and dizzying mood swings. It started on Oct. 7 with the release of a recording in which Mr. Trump was caught bragging about forcibly kissing women and grabbing their genitals.  Many Republicans decided that Mr. Trump’s already shaky campaign was over. Some despondent young staff members at the Republican National Committee on Capitol Hill, who usually work late into the night in the final stretches of a campaign, took to leaving their desks early, in time for happy hour at bars. They complained that Mr. Trump had not just lost the election but was dragging down House and Senate candidates, dooming the entire party.  Photo  Mr. Trump’s aides were just as thrown by the tape. But they saw a chance to salvage his candidacy — on a Civil War battlefield.  His aides outlined 15 bullet points for him to deliver during an Oct. 22 speech in Gettysburg, Pa., to focus voters on a new theme of cleaning up government, even as several women came forward to accuse him of groping them just as he had described in the recording.  But Mr. Trump grew frustrated with the instructions. By the time he was done revising the proposed speech, only about a half-dozen of the original suggestions remained. And over the firm objections of his top advisers, he insisted on using the occasion to issue a remarkable threat: that he would sue all of the women who had gone public with the accusations.  As the advisers begged him to reconsider — it would make him seem small, they warned, and undermine a pivotal speech — Mr. Trump was adamant. There had to be a severe penalty for those who dared to attack him, he said. He could not just sit back and let these women “come at me,” he told one of them.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The speech was roundly criticized and seemed strikingly out of place on such sacred and historic ground. “The Grievanceburg Address,” one journalist deemed it.  Mr. Trump fell into despair, and the gloom already enveloping the Republican political class started to infect his campaign.  On Oct. 23, he learned that an ABC News poll showed him trailing Mrs. Clinton by 12 points. He lashed out, becoming so agitated that his aides planned to confront the network about its calculations and accuse ABC of bias, according to internal emails.  “Do they think Republicans and Trump supporters are not going to vote?” one of Mr. Trump’s pollsters, John McLaughlin, wrote to the group. “Or is this an intentional effort to suppress Trump turnout?”  They pressed the network on its methods, but other polls delivered similarly grim news.  An Injection of Hope  Then came an astonishing development. On Oct. 28, the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, announced that his agency would review newly discovered emails potentially pertinent to its investigation of Mrs. Clinton’s private server.  On an afternoon flight to New Hampshire, Mr. Trump and his aides saw the news splash across the giant flat-screen television on his plane.  Mr. Trump was unsure how to respond.  “What do you think this means?” he asked the small circle traveling with him — Stephen K. Bannon, his campaign’s chief executive; Stephen Miller, his senior policy adviser; and Mr. Lewandowski, his former campaign manager, who lives in New Hampshire.  To the assembled men sitting in white leather seats, the answer was simple: It could turn the election around.  But they insisted that to truly exploit it, Mr. Trump needed to do something he had been incapable of in the past: strictly follow instructions, let a story unfold on its own and resist the urge to endlessly bludgeon his rival.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  They headed to a fleet of cars that whisked them to the Radisson Hotel in downtown Manchester, where a crowd of thousands was waiting for the candidate to take the stage.  But his aides needed time to sketch out what Mr. Trump should say — and not say. They sent Michael T. Flynn, a retired Army lieutenant general, onstage with a mission: stall.  As the aides agonized over which words to feed into the teleprompter, they become so engrossed that a hot light set up next to the machine caused Mr. Bannon’s Kuhl hiking pants to begin smoldering.  “I think my pant leg is on fire,” he said after noticing the acrid smell.  At the rally, Mr. Trump did as he was told, quickly praising the F.B.I. and warning that Mrs. Clinton could not be permitted to “take her criminal scheme into the Oval Office.” Then, improbably, he moved on.  For the next week, his staff deployed a series of creative tricks to protect its boss from his most self-destructive impulses.  Several advisers warned him that he risked becoming like a wild animal chasing its prey so zealously that it raced over a cliff — a reminder that he could pursue his grievances and his eagerness to fling insults, but that the cost would be a plunge into an electoral abyss.  Taking away Twitter turned out to be an essential move by his press team, which deprived him of a previously unfiltered channel for his aggressions.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  On Thursday, as his plane idled on the tarmac in Miami, Mr. Trump spotted Air Force One outside his window. As he glowered at the larger plane, he told Ms. Hicks, his spokeswoman, to jot down a proposed tweet about President Obama, who was campaigning nearby for Mrs. Clinton.  “Why is he campaigning instead of creating jobs and fixing Obamacare?” Mr. Trump said. “Get back to work.” After some light editing — Ms. Hicks added “for the American people” at the end — she published it.  Mr. Bannon, his rumpled campaign chief and a calming presence to the candidate, tried a different approach: appealing to Mr. Trump’s ego and competitive side by suggesting that the Clintons were looking to rattle him.  Photo  “They want to get inside your head,” Mr. Bannon told him. “It’s a trap.”  Of course, it was not easy to keep Mr. Trump focused. He chafed at his advisers’ request that he use a seemingly canned line in a speech — a call to curb government corruption by “draining the swamp” in Washington.  But he finally gave in when he saw the crowd reaction, explaining that even Frank Sinatra disliked one of his biggest songs, “My Way.”  ‘I’m Going to Win’  Mr. Trump still clings to certain prerogatives, such as personally approving every commercial before it reaches a TV screen. During a recent four-hour flight, Mr. Trump painstakingly reviewed a new batch of ads on an aide’s laptop and seized on the smallest details.  He objected to a short clip in one ad that showed him emerging from a hug with a female supporter, worrying that it made him seem dismissive rather than warm.  “It looks like I’m repelling away,” Mr. Trump complained. The ad was fixed.  Over all, though, he seemed pleased by the results, as polls started to tighten and his news media coverage changed. Aboard his plane on Thursday, he seemed struck by an unfamiliar trend: News stories emphasized the intended message of his campaign rallies, not his improvised rants or stray tweets.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “All my quotes are coming from my speeches,” he said. “And that’s a good thing.”  Of course, a few days of good behavior cannot erase 16 months of erratic conduct, and aides acknowledge that their efforts to steer a straight course may falter.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  And they know that his chances of winning the election are iffy: Perhaps their best hope, the F.B.I. inquiry into Mrs. Clinton’s email server, fizzled on Sunday with no charges or revelations. But they maintain that there is unseen money and muscle behind Mr. Trump’s political operation — and a level of sophistication that outsiders, and people who have run traditional campaigns, cannot fully appreciate.  At times, however, that is hard to detect. Over a cheeseburger, fried calamari and an “Ivanka Salad” at the Trump Grill in the basement of Trump Tower last week, several aides flipped open a laptop and loaded the popular website 270towin.com, which allows users to create their own winning electoral maps.  For 10 minutes, they clicked through the country, putting Democratic-leaning states won by Mr. Obama four years ago, like New Mexico and Colorado, into Mr. Trump’s column.  Their analysis seemed more atmospheric than scientific.  “You can go to Pennsylvania,” the campaign’s digital director, Brad Parscale, said, referring to a state that polls show favors Mrs. Clinton. “You can almost slice the excitement with a knife. You can feel it in the air there.”  And even as early-voting returns indicated a surge for Mrs. Clinton, they tried to reassure themselves, over and over, that nobody finishes stronger than Mr. Trump, comparing the wisdom of his political judgments to Babe Ruth pointing his bat to the stands to predict where he would hit a home run.  Back on his plane, heading into the campaign’s final weekend, Mr. Trump reclined in his leather chair and refused to entertain any suggestions that his unorthodox, unpredictable and now uncertain campaign for the presidency would end in defeat.  “I’m going to win,” he said.
“He was like an octopus,” she said. “His hands were everywhere.”  She fled to the back of the plane. “It was an assault,” she said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Leeds has told the story to at least four people close to her, who also spoke with The New York Times.  Mr. Trump’s claim that his crude words had never turned into actions was similarly infuriating to a woman watching on Sunday night in Ohio: Rachel Crooks.  Ms. Crooks was a 22-year-old receptionist at Bayrock Group, a real estate investment and development company in Trump Tower in Manhattan, when she encountered Mr. Trump outside an elevator in the building one morning in 2005.  Photo  Aware that her company did business with Mr. Trump, she turned and introduced herself. They shook hands, but Mr. Trump would not let go, she said. Instead, he began kissing her cheeks. Then, she said, he “kissed me directly on the mouth.”  It didn’t feel like an accident, she said. It felt like a violation.  “It was so inappropriate,” Ms. Crooks recalled in an interview. “I was so upset that he thought I was so insignificant that he could do that.”  Shaken, Ms. Crooks returned to her desk and immediately called her sister, Brianne Webb, in the small town in Ohio where they grew up, and told her what had happened.  “She was very worked up about it,” said Ms. Webb, who recalled pressing her sister for details. “Being from a town of 1,600 people, being naïve, I was like ‘Are you sure he didn’t just miss trying to kiss you on the cheek?’ She said, ‘No, he kissed me on the mouth.’ I was like, ‘That is not normal.’”  In the days since Mr. Trump’s campaign was jolted by a 2005 recording that caught him bragging about pushing himself on women, he has insisted, as have his aides, that it was simply macho bluster. “It’s just words,” he has said repeatedly.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  And his hope for salvaging his candidacy rests heavily on whether voters believe that claim.  They should not, say Ms. Leeds and Ms. Crooks, whose stories have never been made public before. And their accounts echo those of other women who have previously come forward, like Temple Taggart, a former Miss Utah, who said that Mr. Trump kissed her on the mouth more than once when she was a 21-year-old pageant contestant.  In a phone interview on Tuesday night, a highly agitated Mr. Trump denied every one of the women’s claims.  “None of this ever took place,” said Mr. Trump, who began shouting at the Times reporter who was questioning him. He said that The Times was making up the allegations to hurt him and that he would sue the news organization if it reported them.  “You are a disgusting human being,” he told the reporter as she questioned him about the women’s claims.  Photo  Asked whether he had ever done any of the kissing or groping that he had described on the recording, Mr. Trump was once again insistent: “I don’t do it. I don’t do it. It was locker room talk.”  But for the women who shared their stories with The Times, the recording was more than that: As upsetting as it was, it offered them a kind of affirmation, they said.  That was the case for Ms. Taggart. Mr. Trump’s description of how he kisses beautiful women without invitation described precisely what he did to her, she said.  “I just start kissing them,” Mr. Trump said on the tape. “It’s like a magnet. Just kiss. I don’t even wait.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Ms. Crooks and Ms. Leeds never reported their accounts to the authorities, but they both shared what happened to them with friends and family. Ms. Crooks did so immediately afterward; Ms. Leeds described the events to those close to her more recently, as Mr. Trump became more visible politically and ran for president.  Ms. Leeds was 38 at the time and living in Connecticut. She had been seated in coach. But a flight attendant invited her to take an empty seat in first class, she said. That seat was beside Mr. Trump, who did not yet own a fleet of private aircraft, records show. He introduced himself and shook her hand. They exchanged pleasantries, and Mr. Trump asked her if she was married. She was divorced, and told him so.  Later, after their dinner trays were cleared, she said, Mr. Trump raised the armrest, moved toward her and began to grope her. Ms. Leeds said she recoiled. She quickly left the first-class cabin and returned to coach, she said.  “I was angry and shook up,” she recalled, as she sat on a couch in her New York City apartment on Tuesday.  She did not complain to the airline staff at the time, Ms. Leeds said, because such unwanted advances from men occurred throughout her time in business in the 1970s and early 1980s. “We accepted it for years,” she said of the conduct. “We were taught it was our fault.”  She recalled bumping into Mr. Trump at a charity event in New York about two years later, and said he seemed to recall her, insulting her with a crude remark.  She had largely put the encounter on the plane out of her mind until last year, when Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign became more serious. Since then, she has told a widening circle of people, including her son, a nephew and two friends, all of whom were contacted by The Times.  They said they were sickened by what they heard. “It made me shake,” said Linda Ross, a neighbor and friend who spoke with Ms. Leeds about the interaction about six months ago. Like several of Ms. Leeds’s friends, Ms. Ross encouraged her to tell her story to the news media. Ms. Leeds had resisted until Sunday’s debate, which she watched with Ms. Ross.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  When Mr. Trump denied having ever sexually assaulted women, in response to a question from Anderson Cooper of CNN, Ms. Ross said she immediately looked at Ms. Leeds in disbelief. “Now we know he lied straight up,” Ms. Ross recalled saying.  In the days after the debate, Ms. Leeds recounted her experience in an email to The Times and a series of interviews.  “His behavior is deep seated in his character,” Ms. Leeds wrote in the message.  “To those who would vote for him,” she added, “I would wish for them to reflect on this.”  For Ms. Crooks, the encounter with Mr. Trump was further complicated by the fact that she worked in his building and risked running into him again.  A few hours after Mr. Trump kissed her, Ms. Crooks returned to her apartment in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn and broke down to her boyfriend at the time, Clint Hackenburg.  “I asked, ‘How was your day?’” Mr. Hackenburg recalled. “She paused for a second, and then started hysterically crying.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  After Ms. Crooks described her experience with Mr. Trump, she and Mr. Hackenburg discussed what to do.  “I think that what was more upsetting than him kissing her was that she felt like she couldn’t do anything to him because of his position,” he said. “She was 22. She was a secretary. It was her first job out of college. I remember her saying, ‘I can’t do anything to this guy, because he’s Donald Trump.’”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Days later, Ms. Crooks said, Mr. Trump, who had recently married Melania, came into the Bayrock office and requested her phone number. When she asked why he needed it, Mr. Trump told her he intended to pass it along to his modeling agency. Ms. Crooks was skeptical, but relented because of Mr. Trump’s influence over her company. She never heard from the modeling agency.  During the rest of her year working at Bayrock, she made a point of ducking out of sight every time Mr. Trump came into view. When Bayrock employees were invited to the Trump Organization Christmas party, she declined, wanting to avoid any other encounters with him.  But the episode stuck with her even after she returned to Ohio, where she now works for a university. When she read a Times article in May about the Republican nominee’s treatment of women, she was struck by Ms. Taggart’s recollection of being kissed on the mouth by Mr. Trump.  “I was upset that it had happened to other people, but also took some comfort in knowing I wasn’t the only one he had done it to,” said Ms. Crooks, who reached out to The Times to share her story.  Both Ms. Leeds and Ms. Crooks say they support Hillary Clinton’s campaign for president, and Ms. Crooks has made contributions of less than $200 to President Obama and Mrs. Clinton.  Ms. Crooks was initially reluctant to go public with her story, but felt compelled to talk about her experience.  “People should know,” she said of Mr. Trump, “this behavior is pervasive and it is real.”
But Mr. Trump, a twice-divorced casino operator who has boasted of his sexual exploits, is no typical Republican nominee. And it is an open question whether he can count on the votes of the sort of social conservatives who at this time in the campaign are usually hard at work volunteering for the party’s standard-bearer.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  So Mr. Trump, once a regular Howard Stern guest and a Playboy cover boy, momentarily stepped away from the swing states that will decide the presidential race and ventured into the basement ballroom of a Washington hotel to make his pitch. He lamented how difficult it is to raise Christian children today, quoted from Scripture and revealed a bit of news that illustrated how focused he is on turning out core Republican voters. He would, he announced to applause, travel to St. Louis on Saturday to attend the funeral of Phyllis Schlafly, the longtime conservative warrior who died this week at 92.  Mr. Trump was warmly, if not rapturously, received at the annual conference, which is billed as the Values Voter Summit, and displayed a measure of self-awareness. After pledging to undo restrictions on religious liberty, he joked, “I figure that’s the only way I’m getting to heaven.” And he received an ovation after vowing to defend what he termed America’s Christian heritage.  But this was not exactly Mr. Trump’s natural habitat, and what was absent from his speech underscored why he would be compelled to speak to a Christian conservative audience so late in the campaign.  He is ill at ease discussing the issue of abortion — and avoided it entirely when he accepted the presidential nomination in Cleveland — and has been vocal about his hopes that Republicans can win the support of gay voters. And his unfamiliarity with evangelical Christianity makes it hard for him to articulate the importance of defending Israel.  “Support for Israel now rivals the abortion issue in the political lexicon and the hierarchy of issue concerns of evangelical voters,” said Ralph Reed, a longtime conservative Christian leader, who had wanted Mr. Trump to incorporate talk of the Holy Land into his stump speech. “They will not support a candidate that in their view does not support the state of Israel.”  Mr. Trump is, however, comfortable speaking in pugilistic terms and making sport of his rivals. Veering away from cultural matters, he used his speech to belittle Mrs. Clinton’s foreign policy record and promise a vigorous attack on Islamic terrorism. Without reiterating his praise this week for Vladimir V. Putin, Russia’s strongman president, Mr. Trump said he would gladly work with Russia to take on the Islamic State. “If they want to join us on knocking out ISIS,” he said, “that is just fine as far as I’m concerned.”  The Islamic State aimed to destroy “what it calls the nation of the cross,” Mr. Trump said, pointing directly at his audience as he spoke.  And days after Mrs. Clinton said that Islamic terrorists were praying for Mr. Trump’s victory, Mr. Trump fired back the same accusation. “Boy, would they dream of having her as president,” he said of the Islamic State.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump also accused the Obama administration of doing a poor job of accepting Christian refugees from Syria (though he has proposed a total halt to the admission of Syrian refugees.) Such talk and, even more important, the unpopularity of his Democratic opponent on the right, has helped nudge some skeptical evangelicals in Mr. Trump’s direction.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But many in attendance here acknowledged that Mr. Trump is the most secular Republican presidential nominee in recent times. And they were quick to acknowledge that some Christian conservatives still are not ready to cast a vote for somebody who does not share all their values. Some doubters are even in their own families.  “My son-in-law,” said Susan Parker, an attendee from San Antonio who has rallied behind Mr. Trump. “He’s a Republican, but he’s a Christian first. He said, ‘I’m looking at the qualifications of a good leader and he does not qualify.’”  It is those voters who explain why Mr. Trump is still only receiving the support of slightly more than 80 percent of those who identity as Republicans, according to polls. Boosting that number, Mr. Trump’s aides explained after his speech, is why he made the trip to Washington. Mr. Trump has sought to ease conservative discomfort with vows to appoint conservative jurists. And he selected a steadfast Christian conservative, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana, as his running mate.  But Mr. Trump has largely declined to push the issues that have defined the Christian right for decades. In doing so, he has effectively wagered that evangelicals care more about combating political correctness and safeguarding America’s traditional cultural identity than resisting the tide of what they perceive as sexual permissiveness.  As a result, he has ceded the public debate on much of the culture war to Democrats, who have campaigned with enthusiasm as a party supportive of gay rights and opposed to restrictions on abortion.  The stakes are high for both Mr. Trump, who would struggle to win the presidency without the overwhelming support of evangelicals, and religious conservatives, whose political agenda has failed to gain traction during the eight years of the Obama administration.  Mr. Trump has gone to great lengths to win over evangelicals well after securing the nomination. He recently attended a meeting of evangelical pastors in Florida, and hosted an hourslong gathering of Christian conservatives late in June.  Gary Bauer, a prominent Christian activist who ran for president in 2000, said that Mr. Trump was plainly an imperfect fit with the conservative faith community. Mr. Bauer predicted that in the end, reticent conservatives would come around to support him as the best available candidate.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This constituency prefers people that have followed various moral guidelines on a variety of issues,” Mr. Bauer said. “But at the end of the day, you’re not getting a Sunday school preacher here, or a pastor. You’re picking a president.”  David Lane, a social conservative activist who has advised several presidential candidates, said the selection of Mr. Pence was taken by religious conservatives as a friendly signal from Mr. Trump.  But Mr. Lane said he wished Mr. Trump would “do more on the evangelical and pro-life Catholic issues” on the campaign trail. In an email missive to his political organization earlier this summer, Mr. Lane argued that conservative Christians should support Mr. Trump as an alternative to Hillary Clinton, but acknowledged he was a cipher on important issues.  “What and how will Mr. Trump do?” Mr. Lane wrote. “I don’t know.”
It was a decision that would redefine Mr. Pence, setting him on the path to becoming an evangelical Christian and one of the country’s most outwardly religious and socially conservative legislators.  But it also caused him to break with two institutions that had been central to the Pence family: the Roman Catholic Church and the Democratic Party.  Mr. Pence, 57, who accepted the Republican nomination for vice president on Wednesday night, is the only one of six Pence siblings who is no longer part of the Catholic Church. Though the family remains close, his embrace of evangelical Christianity was long a source of disappointment to his mother, according to the Rev. Clement T. Davis, the priest at the church in Columbus, Ind., where Mr. Pence was baptized.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The family’s Irish Catholic roots run deep. Mr. Pence’s maternal grandfather, with whom he was especially close, came to America in 1923 from Ireland and settled in Chicago, where he eventually became a bus driver.  The family idolized John F. Kennedy, the nation’s first Irish-Catholic president. As a teenager, Mike Pence was the youth coordinator for the Bartholomew County Democrats.  All four of the Pence brothers were altar boys at their church, St. Columba, and attended its parochial school. They were at church six days a week, sometimes seven, if they were serving Saturday Mass. Even after they all went off to college, the church would call the Pence house during vacations or over the summer when it was in need of an altar boy.  Photo  “Our life revolved around the church,” Gregory Pence, one of Mr. Pence’s two older brothers, said in an interview, adding that he still went to morning Mass there a few times a week with his mother.  But at Hanover College, a small liberal-arts college in Indiana near the banks of the Ohio River, Mr. Pence came to feel that something was missing from his spiritual life. The Catholicism of his youth, with its formality and rituals, had not given him the intimacy with God that he now found himself craving.  “I began to meet young men and women who talked about having a personal relationship with Jesus Christ,” he said years later in an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network. “That had not been a part of my experience.”  Still, it was not easy for him to leave behind the church in which he had been raised. After graduation, he worked as a Catholic youth minister and even considered becoming a priest. He described himself for years as “an evangelical Catholic.” Friends say he wrestled with how to square his religious past and his religious future.  “He was part of a movement of people, I’ll call it, who had grown up Catholic and still loved many things about the Catholic Church, but also really loved the concept of having a very personal relationship with Christ,” said Patricia Bailey, who became close to Mr. Pence when she and her husband, Mark, worked with him at a law firm in Indianapolis in the mid-1980s.  Video  Mr. Pence’s wife, Karen, was also part of that movement. They met when he was in law school at Indiana University. After they started dating, she bought a gold cross with the word “Yes” engraved on it, and kept it in her purse until he proposed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “She’s been very much a part of his faith journey,” said Mark Bailey, who often started his day by praying with Mr. Pence in one of their offices at the law firm. “He would refer to his wife as the prayer warrior of the family.”  By the mid-1990s, Mr. Pence and his wife were attending an evangelical church in Indianapolis. Years later, the break from Catholicism still stung his mother, Nancy, according to Father Davis, who has been the priest at her church, now called St. Bartholomew, since 1997 and has grown close to her.  “You could see Nancy just shake her head about it,” Father Davis said inside the rectory before Mass on Saturday. “She was disappointed. She had hoped he could find his way back to the church.”  Others in Columbus who knew the Pence family were also surprised. “They were just known as such a big Catholic family,” said Janie Gordon, a friend of Mr. Pence’s from high school.  Photo  Mr. Pence’s mother declined to comment. The governor also declined to be interviewed about his conversion, but he authorized his brother to speak about his family’s faith.  As Mr. Pence’s faith was changing, so were his politics. He voted for Jimmy Carter in 1980 but soon gravitated to Ronald Reagan, and to the Republican Party’s staunch opposition to abortion.  His evangelical Christianity is now the driving force behind his political agenda, whether he is working to deny federal funds to Planned Parenthood or to make it legal for religious conservatives to refuse to serve gay couples.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I sign this law with a prayer that God would continue to bless these precious children, mothers and families,” he said in March, putting his pen to a sweeping abortion bill prohibiting a woman from aborting a fetus because it has a disability such as Down syndrome. (A federal judge blocked the law last month.)  “Pence doesn’t simply wear his faith on his sleeve, he wears the entire Jesus jersey,” Brian Howey, a political columnist in Indiana, once put it.  Video  During Mr. Pence’s days on Capitol Hill, he would not attend events without his wife if alcohol was being served. Fellow representatives sometimes joked about the need to clean up their language when he appeared.  Mr. Pence would not even engage in attack ads, having sworn off negative campaigning after running a particularly nasty and unsuccessful congressional race earlier in his political career. “Christ Jesus came to save sinners, among whom I am foremost of all,” he wrote after the election, quoting a line from Scripture.  When Mr. Pence was in a tight race for governor in 2012, his media strategist, Rex Elsass, invoked a different line from the Bible in an effort to persuade him that attacks from his Democratic opponent justified a direct and forceful response, as long as it was truthful, Mr. Elsass recalled. Mr. Pence refused.  In recent days, however, he has not hesitated to hammer Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic nominee: He has called her “corrupt Hillary,” mimicking Donald J. Trump’s label “crooked Hillary.”  When Mr. Pence returned to his alma mater in 2008 to deliver a commencement address, his speech built toward what he considered to be the most profound experience of his college career.  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “There was one other person I met during my years here who changed my life more than all the friends and family combined,” he said, referring to Jesus Christ. “Thirty years ago this spring, I embraced the truth,” he continued, before quoting a verse from Scripture.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Today, Mr. Pence and his wife often worship at College Park Church, an evangelical megachurch in Indianapolis with three huge video screens, colored spotlights and Christian bands.  On Sunday, the day after Mr. Trump formally introduced Mr. Pence as his running mate in Midtown Manhattan, they sat in the balcony of the theater-style auditorium there, standing and clapping in rhythm with the music.  Several church members talked about their experiences of deepening their faith in God.  There was no talk of Mr. Pence or the election, but one song, its lyrics flashing across the big screens, encouraged the faithful: “Set your church on fire, win this nation back.”  It was a far cry from the wooden pews and kneelers of St. Columba, the austere Catholic church of Mr. Pence’s youth.  Gregory Pence said he did not see his brother’s turn to evangelical Christianity as a rejection of their Catholicisim, but rather as a reflection of the fact that he had different spiritual needs.  The two of them still pray together, just not usually in church. Indeed, Gregory said that when his brother called after learning that Mr. Trump had chosen him as his running mate, they wept and swapped verses from Scripture. (“Well done, my good and faithful servant,” Gregory Pence told his brother.)  He declined to say whether he had been supporting Mr. Trump before his brother joined the ticket. But asked if he thought his brother might have had some doubts about signing on with a man whose résumé includes three wives and a casino empire, and who liberally invokes coarse language and imagery, he answered without hesitation.  “Judge not lest ye be judged,” he said.
“This isn’t all white people!” yelled Mr. English, who is black. “Minorities are voting for Trump, I’m telling you!” (Exit polls showed 87 percent of Mr. Trump’s vote came from whites; 2 percent came from blacks.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. English is the director of a state office that helps businesses owned by minorities compete for government contracts. In his work, he said, he had toured some of the most depressed counties in eastern North Carolina. Before Mr. Trump, he said, it seemed that few politicians were addressing the grievances of people who were economically wounded by free-trade deals that hastened the downfall of the textile industry.  “We need to get those jobs back,” Mr. English said. “You’ve got to be on the ground. I’m talking thousands of people who are walking around those counties unemployed.”  In Wisconsin, Beth Schmidt, chairwoman of the Rock County Republican Party, said she woke up Wednesday morning feeling happy but a little stupefied.  “As a Republican, I should be bouncing off the walls,” she said. “But I don’t know what to think.”  Photo  Ms. Schmidt, a 58-year-old mother of three adult children, is fervently against abortion. She feels that welfare is necessary, but that it has become overused. She was not one of Mr. Trump’s earliest supporters, instead favoring Marco Rubio or Carly Fiorina in the primary season. But she “moved forward” in the general election, deciding to vote for Mr. Trump in the end.  She is convinced that Mr. Trump will surround himself with smart and experienced people. “I think that you’re going to see that he will, surprisingly, bring people together,” she said. “I’m going to pray for this. As time goes on, people are going to see a different Trump.”  To Mark Harris, a businessman from Georgia, Mr. Trump’s indecorous outbursts and often crude behavior were a price worth paying for the shake-up he believed Mr. Trump would bring to government.  “A lot of the American people can put aside him being rough around the edges to take the chance on the change that he talked about,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Harris, 49, a retailer in one of Atlanta’s northern suburbs, could hardly contain his glee over Tuesday’s outcome. It was, he said, an unrestrained rejection of politicians, lobbyists and the news media. “The American people are sick and tired of the government in Washington, D.C.,” he said.  But he also had a warning for Mr. Trump: Break your promises at your peril.  “In four years’ time, we’ll see if he’s smart enough to be able to go through with what he’s promised the American people,” Mr. Harris said. “If he’s able to put into motion what he has proposed over this election, he will win in four years, hands down.”  At the same time, some supporters seem to have installed a sort of custom-built decoder of the Trumpian style, harboring a sense that some of his most audacious promises — like the plan to build a southern border wall, and make Mexico pay for it — are perhaps not best taken literally.  Joseph Connor, of Bergen County, N.J., said it was the general principles in Mr. Trump’s message that were more important, particularly the idea of getting government out of the way of commerce.  “I think it’s time to shed regulation and let Americans do great things in the world,” said Mr. Connor, who works in finance and belies the stereotype of Trump voters as working class and rural. “And I see that in Trump.”  How Will a Trump Presidency Affect Your Country? We want to hear from readers outside the United States on the election of Donald J. Trump. We may publish a selection of the responses. Queremos saber qué opinan nuestros lectores afuera de Estados Unidos tras la elección de Donald Trump como presidente de Estados Unidos. Algunas de estas respuestas podrían ser publicadas. Required fields are marked with an asterisk. How do you think a Trump presidency will affect you and your family? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump te afectará a ti y a tu familia? Continue How do you think a Trump presidency will affect your country? ¿Cómo crees que una presidencia de Trump afectará a tu país? If you had a meeting with the president-elect, what is one thing you would tell him about your life and your country that could inform his foreign policy? Si te pudieras reunir con el presidente electo, ¿qué le contarías sobre tu vida y tu país para informar sus decisiones de política exterior? Continue What is your name? * ¿Cómo te llamas? Where are you from? * ¿De dónde eres? What is your phone number? ¿Cuál es tu teléfono? By submitting to us, you are promising that the content is original, does not plagiarize from anyone or infringe a copyright or trademark, does not violate anyone’s rights and is not libelous or otherwise unlawful or misleading. You are agreeing that we can use your submission in all manner and media of The New York Times and that we shall have the right to authorize third parties to do so. And you agree to our Terms of Service. Thank you for your submission.  At Republicans’ election night party in Phoenix, a pair of friends, Linda M. Wright and Susan Cheatham, pumped their fists and thanked Jesus for Mr. Trump’s victory.  “He’s not going to raise our taxes,” said Ms. Wright, 58, of Phoenix.  “He’s going to protect our borders,” said Ms. Cheatham, 53, of Scottsdale.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “He won’t take our weapons away,” Ms. Wright said.  “He will appoint Supreme Court justices who will protect our Constitution,” Ms. Cheatham said.  “Yeah, protect the Constitution — that’s key,” Ms. Wright concluded.  They agreed that Mr. Trump represents their version of America: a place that loves God and cares for its military.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Nobody has the right to come into our country and steal it from me,” Ms. Wright said. “If you don’t like our country, don’t move here. Don’t come here and try to impose your religion on us.”  “Yeah,” Ms. Cheatham said, “Shariah law.”  With his proposal to ban Muslims from entering the United States and to deport all of the nation’s illegal immigrants (positions that he seems to have since altered), Mr. Trump’s campaign was bound to speak to the country’s white nationalists: In Louisiana on Tuesday, David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader who mounted an unsuccessful Senate bid, celebrated Mr. Trump’s victory.  “The great mass of his supporters, the overwhelming white vote, they also have a right to respect their heritage, their values,” he said. “I believe he’s really an advocate of Western Christian civilization.”  But Mr. Duke rejected the idea that racism was part of Mr. Trump’s message. So did Bridg Webb, 21, who was walking into a celebratory Republican rally at the Rice-Eccles football stadium of the University of Utah on Tuesday.  On the way, Mr. Webb said, someone drove by him and shouted, “Nazis!” That, he said, was exactly what Mr. Trump’s opponents — in the news media, on the left, in urban centers — failed to grasp about voters like him.  Photo  “I’ve been called a bigot; I’ve been called a white supremacist,” he said. “I pride myself on being a good guy. I go out of my way to help people. All these things are so unfair, and it’s all because I said I like Donald Trump.”  Mr. Webb grew up in a Mormon family in Elk Ridge, Utah, a community outside the conservative city of Provo. Though it is a safe place, and though Utah is humming along with 3.4 percent unemployment, Mr. Webb said he felt creeping fears about the threat of terrorism after attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., and Orlando, Fla.  He worried the American economy would not have a stable job for him. He hopes to become a police officer, and he worried that Mrs. Clinton would pass gun restrictions that could disarm law enforcement. Mr. Trump, he said, was a balm for those fears.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Supporters like Jeanne Koval, 57, and her husband, Alan, 59, see themselves as part of a global movement against corrupt governments run by insiders. The couple, who hail from Fenton, Mich., were playing the slots on the Las Vegas Strip on Tuesday night.  Ms. Koval, a nurse, compared her support for Mr. Trump to the support that the Filipino nurses she works with have shown for the president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte.  “They were tired of the corruption, and they want someone who can get something done,” she said.  Neither could specifically say what change they wanted Mr. Trump to make, but they voiced concern about rising health care costs and jobs going overseas. Ms. Koval said her parents’ health care premiums recently increased $600 a month.  In Utah, Olivia Blackham, who was adopted from Guatemala as a baby, voted for Mr. Trump in her first presidential election.  She did so in large part because, she said, she believed America’s immigration system was broken.  Ms. Blackham said she had been frustrated after working with refugees who received free health care while her middle-class friends and family had to pay high premiums and hundreds of dollars for prescriptions. She said she believed Mr. Trump could fix that.  “I’m really passionate about getting it straight,” she said.  But as the reality set in that Mr. Trump would become the 45th president of the United States, Ms. Blackham, 34, expressed a lingering uneasiness.  “I think it’s going to be scary,” Ms. Blackham said. “We’re in for a change.”
Photo  The polls and headlines say it repeatedly: Evangelicals overwhelmingly support Donald J. Trump for president.  But now, a group of more than 75 evangelical leaders has released a declaration saying that those polls and headlines do not speak for them. The group includes African-American, Asian, Hispanic and white evangelical Christians, and it says that the news media and the polls are overlooking nonwhite evangelicals.  Nonwhites make up about a quarter of evangelical Protestants in the United States, according to a study released in 2015 by the Pew Research Center. They are a growing segment of evangelical Christianity in the United States, and they can be found worshiping in their own ethnic churches and as part of racially mixed congregations.  The declaration, released on the website Change.org on Thursday, accuses Mr. Trump of fueling racism and religious bigotry, and of denigrating women. It is not concerned with Mr. Trump’s playboy past, multiple marriages or lack of fluency in Christian language and practice.  “Racism is America’s original sin,” the statement says. “Its brazen use to win elections threatens to reverse real progress on racial equity and set America back.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The declaration does not extend support to Hillary Clinton, noting that she is “both supported and distrusted by a variety of Christian voters.”  The Republican Party has had a lock on white evangelical institutions for more than three decades. A chorus of evangelical church leaders, theologians and radio hosts has been urging Christians to squelch any misgivings and vote for Mr. Trump. At stake, they argue, is the Supreme Court and the potential to undermine the right to abortion and gay marriage.  Mr. Trump may not be the perfect Christian, they argue, but it appears he is the one God chose. As Dan Celia, host of a show on American Family Radio, a Christian network, put it, “Throughout the Bible and church history, God has used unrighteous people to be his rod of righteousness to his people.”  Despite their efforts, nonwhite evangelicals may have a hard time being heard. The latest poll from the Public Religion Research Institute, released on Thursday, said that 69 percent of white evangelical Protestants favored Mr. Trump, while 19 percent supported Mrs. Clinton.
Mr. Trump, who appeared nervous and uncharacteristically subdued beside Mr. Obama, called the president “a good man.” He said that the meeting was “a great honor” and that their conversation had lasted far longer than he would have expected.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “I have great respect,” Mr. Trump said, turning to face Mr. Obama. “We discussed a lot of different situations, some wonderful, and some difficulties. I very much look forward to dealing with the president in the future, including counsel.” Given that Mr. Trump has never held elective office or served in government, some administration aides suggest that Mr. Obama could play a larger-than-usual role in acquainting Mr. Trump with the demands of the office.  “The meeting might’ve been at least a little less awkward than some might have expected,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said. Aides said that the two men discussed foreign and domestic policy issues that Mr. Trump would need to deal with on Day 1 in the Oval Office. As early as Friday, the president-elect will get a version of the President’s Daily Brief, a classified compilation of all threats facing the United States and other highly significant intelligence information.  Photo  Mr. Trump’s trip was surreal for many Republicans and Democrats in Washington, who never expected to see the real estate executive and reality television star in an Oval Office meeting to begin preparations to lead the most powerful nation in the world. Mr. Trump, whose campaign drew support from white supremacist groups, sat just in front of a bust of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in the Oval Office.  Outside in the Rose Garden, reporters could see Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, emerge from the West Wing talking in hushed tones with Jared Kushner, the president-elect’s son-in-law and adviser. The two then headed off for a stroll around the South Lawn. Nearby, aides to Mr. Trump snapped photographs of one another in the White House colonnade, standing in the spot where a crowd of shocked White House aides, some openly crying, had watched the day before as Mr. Obama called for national unity after Mr. Trump’s victory.  The Oval Office meeting was the centerpiece of a marathon day in the capital for Mr. Trump, his first since winning the presidency. His wife, Melania, had tea with Michelle Obama in the White House residence and took in the view of the Washington Monument from the Truman Balcony. White House aides said the two women talked about raising children in the White House.  “We want to make sure that they feel welcome as they prepare to make this transition,” Mr. Obama said of the Trumps.  Later on Capitol Hill, after meeting with Republican congressional leaders who will hold sway over enacting his agenda, Mr. Trump strode with Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, the House speaker, to a balcony overlooking the platform on the west side of the Capitol where he will be sworn in on Jan. 20, 2017, peering out to the National Mall below.  “Really, really beautiful,” he said of the view.  The president-elect arrived in the late morning from New York at Reagan National Airport in his trademark jet with the name Trump emblazoned on its side, and then rode with his wife in a black, armored sport utility vehicle in a motorcade that moved swiftly through Washington. By midafternoon, crowds had gathered on a crisp autumn day on both sides of Pennsylvania Avenue next to the Trump International Hotel, where barricades were set up. Police officers were lined up on motorcycles, officers on horses patrolled the area, and tourists taking photographs mingled with camera crews.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump and his wife had lunch with Mr. Ryan at the Capitol Hill Club, a peace summit meeting after Mr. Ryan had offered tepid support for the Republican nominee during the campaign and Mr. Trump had branded him a “weak and ineffective leader,” threatening retribution.  Photo  Later, after a meeting in Mr. Ryan’s office in the Capitol, Mr. Trump said that he was excited to begin carrying out an agenda to address immigration, health care and tax cuts. Investors, apparently buoyed by the prospect of those tax cuts as well as increased infrastructure spending, sent the Dow Jones industrial average to a record high on Thursday.  “We’re going to do some absolutely spectacular things for the American people,” Mr. Trump said. “We’re going to lower taxes, as you know, we’re going to fix health care and make it more affordable and better. We’re going to do a real job for the public.”  Mr. Trump also met for about an hour with Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader.  “We are looking at jobs,” Mr. Trump told reporters as he left. “Big-league jobs.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  The meetings unfolded as members of Mr. Obama’s staff were starting the business of handing over the vast bureaucracy of the federal government to Mr. Trump’s staff. Speculation swirled over possible appointments in the Trump administration, with Stephen K. Bannon, the conservative provocateur and Mr. Trump’s campaign chief, and Reince Priebus, the Republican National Committee chairman, being mentioned as possible picks for chief of staff.  Top advisers to Mr. Obama have spent months preparing for the transition, a complex venture condensed into the 72 -days before the inauguration. It is up to them and the Trump team to set it in motion, pairing Obama administration staff members with representatives of the president-elect for crash courses in the workings of the White House and federal agencies.  Mr. Obama said Wednesday that he had instructed his staff to follow the example set by President George W. Bush in 2008 and provide a professional and smooth transition for Mr. Trump’s team, despite the policy differences that separate the president and his successor. For all the public drama and division of the presidential campaign, Mr. Obama’s aides have since July been quietly working with advisers to Hillary Clinton and Mr. Trump to plan for the passing of power.  But the crush of information may be onerous, particularly when it comes to Mr. Trump’s task of hiring 4,000 political appointees over a matter of weeks. Saddled with an antiquated personnel system when Mr. Obama was elected in 2008, his aides moved this year to build a new one designed to make it easier to track the positions, as well as the applicants and their personal and professional information.  In December, Mr. Obama’s team plans to hold the first of two war-gaming exercises to prepare Mr. Trump and his staff for a potential national security crisis. The second simulation for Mr. Trump is set for January, days before he officially gains access to the nuclear codes.
But at the arraignment days later in federal court here, no immigrant workers stood before the judge. The only criminal defendants were the owners, Mark Evenson and his son Christopher, and an accountant who worked with them, Diane Ingrid Strehlow. If the Evensons are convicted on all charges against them of tax fraud and harboring illegal workers, they each could face more than 80 years in jail.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Of 42 illegal immigrants caught in the Chuy’s sweep, only one was charged with a crime, and it was not related to the raid. Thirteen workers were processed for immigration violations — which are civil offenses — and detained or deported. The others remained in this country as witnesses or to seek legal status through the immigration courts.  Under President George W. Bush, immigration agents frequently conducted high-profile factory raids, leading away scores of unauthorized workers in handcuffs, often to face jail time for document fraud or identity theft before being deported. After a raid in Postville, Iowa, in 2008, nearly 300 immigrant workers went to federal prison.  The Chuy’s prosecution contrasted with the application by state and county authorities of a law that Arizona adopted in 2007 to punish employers who hire illegal immigrants; the measure was upheld by the Supreme Court on Thursday. Despite the political furor over that law, only a handful of cases have been brought against employers under its terms, which provide mainly for civil penalties. But state authorities have continued to bring criminal cases against illegal immigrant workers, leading to their deportations.  The Obama administration’s record on workplace enforcement has been fiercely debated in Washington since President Obama announced that he would try, against steep odds, to pass an immigration overhaul this year. Administration officials say that their audits and investigations of employers have laid the groundwork for a system that would dissuade companies from hiring illegal immigrants.  “We have steadily increased our efforts to investigate and prosecute employers who violate the law on a serious and grand scale,” said John Morton, the director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, also known as ICE. The next step, administration officials said, is to open a pathway that would allow millions of illegal immigrants in the country to live and work here legally.  Republicans, pointing to the decline in arrests of unauthorized workers, say the administration is failing to remove those immigrants from the work force just when Americans are grappling with high rates of unemployment.  “While President Bush’s so-called get-tough strategy clearly did not do enough to remove illegal workers, President Obama’s strategy is much worse,” said Representative Elton Gallegly, Republican of California, who is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee’s immigration subcommittee.  Photo  Secretary Janet Napolitano of the Homeland Security Department halted the flashier raids in 2009. Until this year, ICE’s leading tactic was “silent raids,” audits of companies’ hiring documents. If immigration inspectors found irregularities suggesting that immigrant workers’ identity documents might be false, managers had to dismiss the workers or risk prosecution.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Last year, according to government figures, the enforcement agency started 2,746 workplace investigations in addition to the audits, more than double the number in 2008, the last full year of the Bush administration. Fines totaling about $43 million, also a record, were levied on companies in immigration cases.  Department of Homeland Security officials, speaking anonymously in order to discuss internal policy, said immigration officers were no longer authorized to carry out workplace raids unless they cooperated with federal prosecutors to prepare criminal cases against the employers. Last year, 119 employers were convicted.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  In March, Rick M. Vartanian, the president of a furniture company in California, was sentenced to 10 months in prison for hiring illegal immigrants. A federal investigation is also under way into hiring practices at the Chipotle chain of Mexican fast-food restaurants.  Dennis K. Burke, the United States attorney for Arizona, who led the Chuy’s prosecutions, called them a “game changer” for the state. During a lengthy inquiry, investigators, including undercover operatives, discovered that the Evensons were keeping two sets of books: one for waiters and cashiers, Mr. Burke said, and another for Mexican kitchen workers.  According to the indictment, a customer complained to Mark Evenson that he was employing illegal immigrants. “I need to hide you in the kitchen,” Mr. Evenson is said to have told one Hispanic employee he knew to be undocumented.  Mr. Burke said prosecutors saw that they could accuse the Evensons under the severe penalties of the tax code — “the hammer,” as he put it. Charged with evading more than $400,000 in taxes on wages for some 360 unauthorized immigrant workers, the Evensons together face more than $10 million in fines if convicted on all counts. They have pleaded not guilty, and their lawyers declined to comment, saying they awaited evidence from prosecutors.  Unusually, even immigration lawyers who represented Chuy’s workers spoke favorably of the federal handling of the case.  “ICE was nice,” said Delia Salvatierra, a lawyer in Phoenix who represents two workers who were in the process of gaining legal status when they were detained. “It was as benign as it can get,” she said. Officers released the two workers so they could pursue their cases in immigration court.  The two of them, who are brothers, said they came to the United States from Mexico in the 1990s. Both had worked most of the time since in Chuy’s restaurants. The eldest, Alejandro Díaz Ojeda, 36, learned to cook the Chuy’s menu. Then he taught his brother, Javier, who is 30.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The brothers said they had been treated well. “I became very fond of the company,” Javier said.  Their experience, however, suggests how the Evensons kept their menu prices famously low. The brothers said they were paid an hourly wage — Javier made $9.50 after 14 years — by payroll check for the first 40 hours a week. Any overtime was paid with a different check, with no taxes deducted and no higher rate, they said. Both brothers said they often worked 70 hours a week.  The severe charges against the Evensons registered broadly with Arizona executives, business leaders here in Tucson said. But they said the case was mainly a cautionary lesson for managers who knowingly hire unauthorized immigrants.  “If companies are paying workers under the table,” said Glenn Hamer, president of the Arizona Chamber of Commerce and Industry, “we encourage the federal government to throw the book at them.”
WASHINGTON — In an effort to crack down on illegal labor, the Department of Homeland Security intends to step up enforcement efforts against employers who knowingly hire such workers.  Under guidelines to be issued Thursday to Immigration and Customs Enforcement field offices, agents will be instructed to take aim at employers and supervisors for prosecution “through the use of carefully planned criminal investigations.”  Senior officials of the Homeland Security Department said Wednesday that illegal workers would continue to be detained in raids on workplaces. But the officials said they hoped to mark an abrupt departure from past practices by making those arrests as part of an effort to build criminal and civil cases against employers.  Under the Bush administration, the officials said, most raids were conducted largely on the basis of tips that an employer was hiring illegal workers, rather than on information gleaned from audits of employer records or undercover investigations. As a result, agents rounded up thousands of illegal immigrants but rarely developed the evidence necessary to show whether businesses were knowingly using illegal labor.  Last year, for example, nearly 6,000 people were arrested in workplace immigration raids across the country, but only 135 were employers or managers. The new guidelines, meant to provide a road map to agents who have been operating with little guidance and oversight from Washington, instruct them to pursue evidence against the employer before going after the workers.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Enforcement efforts focused on employers better target the root causes of illegal immigration,” say the guidelines, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times. “ICE must prioritize the criminal prosecution of actual employers who knowingly hire illegal workers because such employers are not sufficiently punished or deterred by the arrest of their illegal work force.”  The rules could draw a storm of complaints from employers, who argue that they are easily duped by workers with bogus documents and that the government has not established a reliable system for verifying immigration status.  The rules are likely to win praise, though, from advocates who have long considered raids at work sites to be symbols of a crackdown that, they say, violates workers’ rights and divides immigrant families while ignoring employer abuses. Raising the bar on what is required to undertake such raids could result in fewer of them.  Photo  The guidelines are a significant step toward President Obama’s pledge to overhaul the nation’s immigration system. The president’s aides said recently that he would ask Congress this year to consider changes that among other things would give legal status to the estimated 12 million illegal immigrants now in the country.  But a worsening economy could weaken political support for such changes. In the meantime, the administration has begun a review of steps it can take without Congressional approval.  In his news conference Wednesday night, Mr. Obama restated his commitment to an immigration overhaul, saying the United States could not continue with a “broken” system. With regard specifically to workplace enforcement, he said he was looking for “a more thoughtful approach than just raids of a handful of workers, as opposed to, for example, taking seriously the violation of companies that sometimes are actively recruiting these workers to come in.”  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “That’s something we can start doing administratively,” he added.  Among Janet Napolitano’s first acts as secretary of homeland security was to order reviews of many parts of the nation’s immigration system. Ms. Napolitano promised to stem the rising tide of illegal immigration by strengthening border enforcement and cracking down on employers who hire illegal immigrants.  Work on the guidelines that are to be issued Thursday began after a February raid against a mechanic shop in Bellingham, Wash., where 28 illegal workers were seized. Ms. Napolitano, angry in part that her office had not been notified about the raid, ordered a review, and a couple of weeks later ICE officials took possession of the employer’s files, released the immigrants from detention and gave them permission to work while they cooperated with an investigation of the company, Yamato Engine Specialists. That inquiry continues.  One senior official said ICE agents worked from a field manual offering a menu of strategies that can be used in pursuit of workplace enforcement. But the manual does not lay out the order in which the strategies should be employed, or explain the agency’s objectives. As a result, enforcement actions have been undertaken at the discretion of each field manager rather than Washington’s direction.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “That’s how you ended up with investigations that focused on low-hanging fruit,” the official said, “rather than on both the employers and the illegal workers that they intentionally hired.”  Among the most significant of the new guidelines is one in which agents are instructed to “obtain indictments, criminal arrest or search warrants, or a commitment from a U.S. attorney’s office to prosecute the targeted employer, before arresting employees for civil immigration violations at a work site.”  The guidelines call on agents to seek civil penalties, including fines and disbarment from federal contracts, in cases where they do not have enough evidence to press criminal charges. And they require that at least 14 days before conducting a raid, the relevant field office notify ICE headquarters with information including a proposed strategy for prosecuting the employer.  They also require that rules involving humanitarian considerations be taken into account in raids on work sites that have at least 25 employees. Those rules, which previously applied to raids involving at least 150 workers, generally allow the authorities to release detainees who are sick or who are sole caregivers for small children.
But if Mr. Trump makes good on his campaign promises, experts in climate change policy warn, that legacy would unravel quickly. The world, then, may have no way to avoid the most devastating consequences of global warming, including rising sea levels, extreme droughts and food shortages, and more powerful floods and storms.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump has already vowed to “cancel” last year’s Paris climate agreement, which commits more than 190 countries to reduce their emissions of planet-warming carbon dioxide pollution, and to dismantle the Clean Power Plan, Mr. Obama’s domestic climate change regulations.  “If Trump steps back from that, it makes it much less likely that the world will ever meet that target, and essentially ensures we will head into the danger zone,” said Michael Oppenheimer, a professor of geosciences and international affairs at Princeton University and a member of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which produces global reports on the state of climate science.  Mr. Trump cannot legally block other countries from fulfilling their Paris agreement commitments, nor can he quickly or unilaterally erase Mr. Obama’s climate rules.  But he can, as president, choose not to carry out the Paris plan in the United States. And he could so substantially slow or weaken the enforcement of Mr. Obama’s rules that they would have little impact on reducing emissions in the United States, at least during Mr. Trump’s term.  That could doom the Paris agreement’s goal of reducing carbon dioxide emissions enough to stave off an atmospheric warming of at least 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, the point at which, many scientists say, the planet will be locked into an irreversible future of extreme and dangerous warming.  Without the full participation of the United States, the world’s second-largest greenhouse gas polluter, after China, that goal is probably unattainable, even if every other country follows through on its pledges.  And, the experts say, without the participation of the United States, other governments are less likely to carry out their pledged emissions cuts.  “That target is already extremely difficult to achieve, but it could be done with very hard, very diligent work by every single country,” Mr. Oppenheimer said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The election of Mr. Trump is likely to cast a pall over Marrakesh, Morocco, where global negotiators have gathered for a 12-day conference to hash out the next steps for the Paris accord: how to verify commitments are being met, and how to pay for enforcement by poor countries that cannot afford the technology or energy disruptions.  Traveling in New Zealand, Secretary of State John Kerry was asked if he still planned to attend the conference, given the results of the election.  “I’m absolutely going to Marrakesh, perhaps even more important,” he said. “And I look forward to being there very, very much.”  Pessimism appears to be warranted. Mr. Oppenheimer and other climate policy experts said all major emitters needed to take action in the near term to stave off the 3.6-degree increase.  Scientific reports released over the last two years have concluded that the measurable warming of the planet because of human activities has already begun. This year is on track to be the hottest on record, blasting past the previous records set in 2015 and 2014.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  An analysis by Climate Interactive, a scientific think tank that provides data used by many governments, concluded that the policies by the United States would account for about 20 percent of the expected greenhouse gas reductions under the Paris plan from 2016 to 2030. But absent the expected policy actions in the United States under the Trump administration, scientists at Climate Interactive said, the math of emissions reductions will be much more difficult to maintain.  “Pessimists will find abundant support for despair this morning,” John Sterman, a professor of system dynamics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wrote in a Climate Interactive analysis on Wednesday morning.  “With Mr. Trump in the Oval Office and Republican majorities in both houses,” Mr. Sterman wrote, “there is little hope that the Clean Power Plan will survive in the Supreme Court or for federal action to meet the U.S. commitment under the Paris accord. Worse, other key emitter nations — especially India — now have little reason to follow through on their Paris pledges: If the U.S. won’t, why should developing nations cut their emissions?”  The Clean Power Plan is the ambitious centerpiece of Mr. Obama’s climate change legacy and the key to his commitment under the Paris accord. At its heart is a set of Environmental Protection Agency regulations intended to curb planet-warming pollution from coal-fired power plants. If enacted, the rules could transform the American electricity sector, close hundreds of coal-fired plants and usher in the construction of vast new wind and solar farms. The plan is projected to cut United States power plant emissions 32 percent from 2005 levels by 2030.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But the program is currently under litigation by 28 states and more than 100 companies, and it is expected to go before the Supreme Court as early as next year.  More Reporting on Climate Change  Mr. Trump and other Republicans have attacked the Clean Power Plan as a “war on coal.” As president, Mr. Trump would not have the legal authority to unilaterally undo the regulations, which were put forth by the E.P.A. under a provision of the 1970 Clean Air Act.  However, Mr. Trump could target the rules by appointing an industry-friendly justice to the Supreme Court and then refusing to defend the plan when it goes before the court.  He could also direct the E.P.A. to reissue the plan to be extremely friendly to industry. Such a move would also be subject to lawsuits by environmental advocates, which would further drag out the process. And in concert with congressional Republicans, he could decimate the E.P.A.’s budget, crippling its rule-making capacity.  “They may still have to have a regulation, but they don’t have to do it the way the Obama administration did it,” said Jeff Holmstead, a former E.P.A. official in the George W. Bush administration. “And in the meantime, those suits often go on for years and years.”  Even if Mr. Trump ultimately fails to gut Mr. Obama’s climate change rules, he could ensure that their enforcement is delayed through his term, as lawsuits wind their way through the courts.  Mr. Trump would face difficulties in his plans to eliminate the E.P.A., although it is likely he could substantively reduce its size. He would need approval from Congress to completely erase the agency, said Jody Freeman, a professor of environmental law at Harvard University and a former counselor to Mr. Obama.  Ms. Freeman noted that several major environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act, specifically call for rules to be enacted and overseen by the E.P.A. Changing those decades-old rules would also require action from Congress, and Senate Democrats would certainly block such efforts — unless Senate Republican leaders opt to scuttle what is left of filibuster rules already weakened by Democrats.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In China, the world’s largest greenhouse gas polluter, climate change officials said they intended to continue with plans to cut carbon emissions regardless of Mr. Trump’s plans. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has vowed under the Paris agreement that Chinese emissions will drop after 2030, and that China will put in place a national system next year to force companies to pay a fee for their carbon pollution.  “China’s attitude toward low-carbon development, as President Xi Jinping has said when he met with Secretary of State Kerry earlier, is that tackling climate change is not something anybody asks us to do,” Chai Qimin, a Chinese negotiator, said in an emailed response from the Marrakesh talks. “It’s what we want to do.”  But in India, the world’s third-largest greenhouse gas polluter, the election of Mr. Trump has raised doubts about a willingness to move forward. Under the Obama administration, Hillary Clinton, then secretary of state, pledged that rich countries would mobilize $100 billion annually by 2020 to help poor countries make the transition to cleaner forms of energy. Indian officials have made clear that their steps to cut emissions will depend on financial aid from rich countries, but Mr. Trump has also vowed to cut all “global warming payments.”  “I think most certainly it will affect the momentum in negotiations because it throws up a lot of questions,” said Arunabha Ghosh, chief executive of the Council on Energy, Environment and Water, a New Delhi policy group.  “The chances of public funds coming from climate finance are much more dismal now,” he said. “Right now I don’t feel very optimistic.”
Photo  WASHINGTON — President Obama poked fun at Hillary Clinton’s lack of appeal among young people Saturday night, joking at the annual White House press corps dinner that Mrs. Clinton was like an aging relative who cannot figure out how to use Facebook.  “Did you get my poke? Is it on my wall?” he said, imagining Mrs. Clinton trying to use the popular social media site. “I’m not sure I’m using this right. Love, Aunt Hillary.”  Mr. Obama also needled Mrs. Clinton for paid speeches she gave for Goldman Sachs. He noted that if his comedy routine, during his final appearance at the White House Correspondents’ Association dinner, was successful, he could earn “serious Tubmans” — a nod to Harriet Tubman, the American abolitionist whose image will be printed on future $20 bills.  He referred to Senator Bernie Sanders, who was in the audience, as “comrade,” a reference to his political status as a democratic socialist.  But the president reserved his most biting commentary for the Republicans running for president, repeatedly turning to the party’s chaotic nominating contest for comedic fodder.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Obama mocked Senator Ted Cruz for calling a basketball hoop a “basketball ring” while campaigning in Indiana.  “What else is in his lexicon?” Mr. Obama asked, working hard to contain a broad smile. “Baseball sticks? Football hats?”  He paused, then added: “But sure, I’m the foreign one.”  The president showed a picture of Gov. John Kasich of Ohio eating pancakes as he noted that “some candidates aren’t polling high enough to qualify for their own joke tonight.” And he tweaked Republicans in the audience for their search for an alternative candidate, noting that the options for dinner were steak or fish.  “A whole bunch of you wrote in Paul Ryan,” he said. “You may not like steak or fish. But that’s your choice.”  Video  And then there was Donald Trump. Mr. Obama riffed at length about Mr. Trump, the billionaire-turned-front-runner, who was not in attendance. The president wondered aloud why Mr. Trump had chosen not to be there.  “You’ve got a room full of reporters, celebrities, cameras, and he said no,” Mr. Obama said. “Is this dinner too tacky for the Donald?”  He joked that Mr. Trump had some foreign policy experience because “he has spent years meeting with leaders from around the world: Miss Sweden, Miss Argentina, Miss Azerbaijan.”  And he noted that Mr. Trump may be the best person to succeed in closing the prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Trump knows a thing or two about running waterfront properties into the ground,” Mr. Obama said.  The president delivered his remarks with deft comic timing in a lengthy monologue that was both ironic and introspective.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Members of the news media did not escape the president’s acerbic sense of humor. He joked that the movie “Spotlight,” about The Boston Globe’s investigation into sexual abuse by Catholic priests and holding the powerful accountable, was “the best fantasy film since ‘Star Wars.’” And he tweaked the news media for giving Mr. Trump “the appropriate amount of coverage, befitting the seriousness of his candidacy.”  Mr. Obama’s most personal jab at a journalist was aimed at Jake Tapper, the host of “The Lede” on CNN. He noted that several journalists had left the White House beat in recent years, and then added: “Jake Tapper left journalism to join CNN,” prompting Mr. Tapper to raise a wine glass.  As has been his habit, Mr. Obama made fun of himself. He joked about his age — and the common maladies that afflict men over 50 — suggesting that he felt far older than he did when he became president.  Video  “Hillary once questioned whether I’d be ready for a 3 a.m. phone call,” he recalled. “Now I’m awake anyway because I’ve got to go to the bathroom.”  He also noted that he had spent two days in London recently having lunch with Queen Elizabeth II, playing golf with Prime Minister David Cameron, and seeing a Shakespeare performance at the Globe Theater.  “Just in case anyone is debating whether I’m black enough, that should settle the debate,” he said.  Perhaps the most surprising moment of the president’s appearance came in a video produced by the White House showing Mr. Obama considering how to spend his time after leaving office.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In the video, Mr. Obama first turns to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. for advice. But then the president decides to call someone else for help — former House Speaker John A. Boehner, a Republican who was once a fierce adversary.  The video shows the president and Mr. Boehner sitting in the White House movie theater watching the ending of “Toy Story.” Mr. Boehner notes that he finally got the “grand bargain” that had eluded the two leaders during budget talks.  “On a sweet Chevy Tahoe,” Mr. Boehner says, pulling out a pack of cigarettes and offering one to Mr. Obama, who has spent his presidency chewing nicotine gum to try to kick his smoking habit. The president’s eyes go wide.  Mr. Obama closed his appearance on a serious note, saluting Jason Rezaian, the Washington Post reporter who had been held in an Iranian prison, and who attended the dinner Saturday night. He promised that his administration would “continue to fight” for journalists held against their will.  And he praised the Washington press corps for trying to resist the commercial pressures to dumb down journalism, saying that “there are so many of you who are pushing against those trends.”  He then offered just two words: “Obama out.” He dropped his microphone, and turned from the podium.
“I don’t think we have a right to lecture,” Mr. Trump said in a wide-ranging interview in his suite in a downtown hotel here, while keeping an eye on television broadcasts from the Republican National Convention. “Look at what is happening in our country,” he said. “How are we going to lecture when people are shooting policemen in cold blood?” (Read the full transcript.)  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  During a 45-minute conversation, Mr. Trump re-emphasized the hard-line nationalist approach that has marked his improbable candidacy, describing how he would force allies to shoulder defense costs that the United States has borne for decades, cancel longstanding treaties he views as unfavorable, and redefine what it means to be a partner of the United States.  He said the rest of the world would learn to adjust to his approach. “I would prefer to be able to continue” existing agreements, he said, but only if allies stopped taking advantage of what he called an era of American largess that was no longer affordable.  Giving a preview of his address to the convention on Thursday night, he said that he would press the theme of “America First,” his rallying cry for the past four months, and that he was prepared to scrap the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada if he could not negotiate radically better terms.  Within hours of Mr. Trump’s remarks calling into question whether, as president, he would automatically defend NATO allies, European officials who were already nervous about American commitments appeared a little stunned by his comments.  “Solidarity among allies is a key value for NATO,” Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary general and a former prime minister of Norway, said in a statement. He said he did not wish to “interfere” with the American election, but added: “Two world wars have shown that peace in Europe is also important for the security of the United States.”  The United States created the 28-nation alliance, and Article 5 of the NATO treaty, signed by President Truman, requires any member to come to the aid of another that NATO declares was attacked. It has been invoked only once: NATO pledged to defend the United States after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.  That commitment has long been considered a central element of deterring attacks in Europe, especially against smaller and weaker nations like Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which joined after the breakup of the Soviet Union.  The president of Estonia, Toomas Hendrik Ilves, one of the most pro-American allies in the region, quickly posted on Twitter evidence that his small country was meeting its defense commitments, and noted it had contributed to the mission in Afghanistan.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump also said he was pleased that the controversy over similarities between passages in a speech by his wife, Melania, to the convention on Monday night and one that Michelle Obama gave eight years ago appeared to be subsiding. “In retrospect,” he said, it would have been better to explain what had happened — that an aide had incorporated the comments — a day earlier.  When asked what he hoped people would take away from the convention, Mr. Trump said, “The fact that I’m very well liked.”  Mr. Trump conceded that his approach to dealing with the United States’ allies and adversaries was radically different from the traditions of the Republican Party — whose candidates, since the end of World War II, have almost all pressed for an internationalist approach in which the United States is the keeper of the peace, the “indispensable nation.”  “This is not 40 years ago,” Mr. Trump said, rejecting comparisons of his approaches to law-and-order issues and global affairs to Richard Nixon’s. Reiterating his threat to pull back United States troops deployed around the world, he said, “We are spending a fortune on military in order to lose $800 billion,” citing what he called America’s trade losses. “That doesn’t sound very smart to me.”  Mr. Trump repeatedly defined American global interests almost purely in economic terms. Its roles as a peacekeeper, as a provider of a nuclear deterrent against adversaries like North Korea, as an advocate of human rights and as a guarantor of allies’ borders were each quickly reduced to questions of economic benefit to the United States.  No presidential candidate in modern times has ordered American priorities that way, and even here, several speakers have called for a far more interventionist policy, more reminiscent of George W. Bush’s party than of Mr. Trump’s.  But Mr. Trump gave no ground, whether the subject was countering North Korea’s missile and nuclear threats or dealing with China in the South China Sea. The forward deployment of American troops abroad, he said, while preferable, was not necessary.  “If we decide we have to defend the United States, we can always deploy” from American soil, Mr. Trump said, “and it will be a lot less expensive.”  Sign Up for the First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Many military experts dispute that view, saying the best place to keep missile defenses against North Korea is in Japan and the Korean Peninsula. Maintaining such bases only in the United States can be more expensive because of the financial support provided by Asian nations.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump’s discussion of the crisis in Turkey was telling, because it unfolded at a moment in which he could plainly imagine himself in the White House, handling an uprising that could threaten a crucial ally in the Middle East. The United States has a major air base at Incirlik in Turkey, where it carries out attacks on the Islamic State and keeps a force of drones and about 50 nuclear weapons.  Mr. Trump had nothing but praise for President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the country’s increasingly authoritarian but democratically elected leader. “I give great credit to him for being able to turn that around,” Mr. Trump said of the coup attempt on Friday night. “Some people say that it was staged, you know that,” he said. “I don’t think so.”  Asked if Mr. Erdogan was exploiting the coup attempt to purge his political enemies, Mr. Trump did not call for the Turkish leader to observe the rule of law, or Western standards of justice. “When the world sees how bad the United States is and we start talking about civil liberties, I don’t think we are a very good messenger,” he said.  The Obama administration has refrained from any concrete measures to pressure Turkey, fearing for the stability of a crucial ally in a volatile region. But Secretary of State John F. Kerry has issued several statements urging Mr. Erdogan to follow the rule of law.  Mr. Trump offered no such caution for restraint to Turkey and nations like it. However, his argument about America’s moral authority is not a new one: Russia, China, North Korea and other autocratic nations frequently cite violence and disorder on American streets to justify their own practices, and to make the case that the United States has no standing to criticize them.  Mr. Trump said he was convinced that he could persuade Mr. Erdogan to put more effort into fighting the Islamic State. But the Obama administration has run up, daily, against the reality that the Kurds — among the most effective forces the United States is supporting against the Islamic State — are being attacked by Turkey, which fears they will create a breakaway nation.  Video  Asked how he would solve that problem, Mr. Trump paused, then said: “Meetings.”  Ousting President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, he said, was a far lower priority than fighting the Islamic State — a conclusion the White House has also reached, but has not voiced publicly.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Assad is a bad man,” Mr. Trump said. “He has done horrible things.” But the Islamic State, he said, poses a far greater threat to the United States.  He said he had consulted two former Republican secretaries of state, James A. Baker III and Henry Kissinger, saying he had gained “a lot of knowledge,” but did not describe any new ideas about national security that they had encouraged him to explore.  Mr. Trump emphatically underscored his willingness to drop out of Nafta unless Mexico and Canada agreed to negotiate new terms that would discourage American companies from moving manufacturing out of the United States. “I would pull out of Nafta in a split second,” he said.  He talked of funding a major military buildup, starting with a modernization of America’s nuclear arsenal. “We have a lot of obsolete weapons,” he said. “We have nuclear that we don’t even know if it works.”  The Obama administration has a major modernization program underway, focused on making the nuclear arsenal more reliable, though it has begun to confront the huge cost of upgrading bombers and submarines. That staggering bill, estimated at $500 billion or more, will land on the desk of the next president.  Mr. Trump used the “America First” slogan in an earlier interview with The New York Times, but on Wednesday he insisted he did not mean it in the way that Charles A. Lindbergh and other isolationists used it before World War II.  “To me, ‘America First’ is a brand-new, modern term,” he said. “I never related it to the past.”  He paused a moment when asked what it meant to him.  “We are going to take care of this country first,” he said, “before we worry about everyone else in the world.”
The torture of terrorism suspects, something that President Obama explicitly banned, would return — interrogation techniques the current C.I.A. director recently said his officers would never return to.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Although Mr. Trump will not be able to pull the United States out of the Paris climate accord, he can legally ignore its provisions, in keeping with his questioning of the existence of man-made climate change. He could proceed with what he once called a ban on Muslims’ entering the country, but later amended – after being accused of racism – to a ban on visitors from a list of troubled nations, almost all of which are Muslim-majority.  He would pull back the troops that the United States has stationed around the world to keep the peace – unless America is paid for the protection. He would tell NATO that the United States will live up to its post-World War II security commitments only if other nations first pay their fair share. He repeatedly dismissed the idea that those forward deployments are in America’s own interests, that they prevent Chinese or Russian adventurism and keep open the trade routes for American goods.  As the president-elect, Mr. Trump will soon be briefed on how to use America’s nuclear codes – the codes Hillary Clinton and Mr. Obama said he could never be trusted to hold. And within the first year of his presidency, it should become clear whether Mr. Trump meant it when he said that he was comfortable with the thought that Japan and South Korea, both signatories to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, might abandon its longtime commitment and build weapons of their own.  If the United States “keeps on its path, its current path of weakness, they’re going to want to have that anyway, with or without me discussing it,” Mr. Trump said.  Perhaps the most unpredictable matter is how Mr. Trump will deal with Russia and its president, Vladimir V. Putin, whom he has repeatedly praised in terms that shocked even his own party. Would he lift the sanctions over Russia’s annexation of Crimea – a move that Mr. Trump seemed to suggest was justified – and its harassment of Ukraine? Would he back off from the Obama administration’s decision to bolster the American military presence off Russia’s borders?  There has been a growing bipartisan consensus in the foreign policy and intelligence leadership that Russia must be both constrained and contained, its harassment of the new members of NATO halted, its cyberattacks deterred. But Mr. Trump never once argued for Russian containment – once a staple of his party’s foreign policy – and repeatedly argued that he, and he alone, could negotiate with authoritarians like Mr. Putin.  “My administration,” he said recently, “will work with any country that is willing to partner with us to defeat ISIS, and halt radical Islamic terrorism. And that includes Russia.” On Wednesday, Mr. Putin seemed to return that sentiment, sensing his opportunity and saying he looked forward to restoring “fully fledged” relations with the United States.  Mr. Trump dismissed Russia’s human rights violations, its jailing of journalists and political opponents, its rigged elections. He would measure the country, he said, solely by its willingness to chip into American projects.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “If they want to join us by knocking out ISIS, that is just fine as far as I’m concerned,” he said. “It is a very imperfect world, and you can’t always choose your friends. But you can never fail to recognize your enemies.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump has been consistent in some areas. Since the late 1980s, he has nurtured a set of preoccupations, chiefly that America’s allies – Japan and Saudi Arabia among them – are ripping America off. He maintained that position even as Japan faded from the scene as a major world power and as Saudi Arabia emerged as one of America’s most critical allies in a region of the world where Mr. Trump sees little reason for the United States to remain.  In an interview in March, he had no compunction about threatening the kingdom’s survivability. “If Saudi Arabia was without the cloak of American protection,” Mr. Trump said during a 100-minute conversation, “I don’t think it would be around.”  The mystery is how much of that kind of talk arises from deeply held beliefs, and how much is an opening bid by the author of “The Art of the Deal.”  “He sees himself as a dealer, a negotiator who knows that you get nowhere unless you threaten,” said Graham Allison, a longtime Harvard professor who has begun a new project in “applied history,” taking lessons from past moments to inform America’s current strategic choices.  Indeed, the world is about to discover whether the most outlandish promises Mr. Trump made in his campaign about rethinking the international order – thoughts that often seemed at best off the cuff – are about to become reality.  Financial markets abroad panicked on Tuesday night, fearful that a Trump presidency would instantly send the country into uncertain economic territory that investors had discounted as wholly improbable just 24 hours ago. But there was a far more mild decline as Wall Street opened, suggesting that investors here saw other possibilities. Mr. Trump, who never argued with the notion that he is a protectionist, time and again vowed to punish companies that move jobs abroad, a task that would begin with the abolishment of Nafta, the trade agreement that once was envisioned, by President Bill Clinton, as the first step unifying the Western Hemisphere. To Mr. Trump, it is “a disaster.”  The Trump vision, in fact, is an America unbound by a half-century of trade deals, free to pursue a nationalistic approach in which success is measured not by the quality of its alliances but the economic return on its transactions. “We will not be ripped off anymore,” he said in the interview in March. “We’re going to be friendly with everybody, but we’re not going to be taken advantage of by anybody.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He bristled at the suggestion that his wall-building, trade-deal-canceling views would take America back to an era of isolationism, arguing that he was simply freeing the United States from the binds of international rules that are not in the nation’s interests.  “Not isolationist, but I am America first,” he said when he was asked whether his own policies had echoes of the movement by the same name championed by Charles Lindbergh in the 1930s.  “I like the expression,” he said of “America first.” From that moment on, he began using it at his rallies, and it became the stuff of bumper stickers and chants.  He is also unabashedly business first, and that extends to his tax proposals, which also leave the markets deeply uncertain.  Starting with the day he descended the long escalator in Trump Tower in June 2015 to begin a quest almost no one thought would succeed, Mr. Trump laid out an agenda of tax cuts – modest for families, and sharp for businesses – that he argued would be the stimulus a sluggish economy needs.  But he also paired those cuts with a major plan to rebuild America’s dilapidated airports and collapsing bridges, with $137 billion in federal tax credits as an incentive for private industry to spend upward of a trillion more. While privatization is hardly a new idea, Mr. Trump has described an approach few have ever tried before – and it is far from clear how it would work. Presumably, users of that infrastructure would ultimately pay for it, in tolls and usage taxes, through a mechanism few understand.  No one knows how much of this agenda, largely thrown together rather than the product of deep study and debate, is for real. His policy office in Washington, created to lay out the position-papers common to most campaigns, was gradually disbanded. He is famously volatile, capable of changing his mind in an instant if he sees new avenues for profit, all the while denying he had ever suggested another path.  In Mr. Trump, Professor Allison sees a revolution in approach reminiscent of the 1828 election of Andrew Jackson, another populist who rode to power rebelling against what amounted to America’s first Establishment.  “My God,” Professor Allison said on Tuesday night, as the results veered toward Mr. Trump. “We are in a strange new land.”
Exit polls for 2010 will be available when all polls close in this race.  Methodology  Data for 2016 were collected by Edison Research for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, The Associated Press, CBSNews, CNN, Fox News and NBC News. The voter survey is based on questionnaires completed by 24,537 voters leaving 350 voting places throughout the United States on Election Day including 4,398 telephone interviews with early and absentee voters.  In 2012, 2008 and 2004, the exit poll was conducted by Edison/Mitofsky; in 1996 and 2000 by Voter News Services; in 1992 by Voter Research and Surveys; and in earlier years by The New York Times and CBS News.  Direct comparisons from year to year should factor in differences in how questions were asked. Race and sex were determined by interviewers in surveys before 1984. Independent or third-party candidates are not shown.  Population scaling is representative of the number of voters in each category.  *Change is shown in percentage points. When comparable data are available, this measure combines the change in Republican support and the change in Democratic support from the previous election.
Mr. Christie will become a vice chairman of the transition effort, the campaign said.  The new inner circle at the transition offices will direct the activities of dozens of corporate consultants, lobbyists and other specialists who will be responsible for recommending candidates for agency jobs across the breadth of the federal government. Some of those advisers come from industries for which they are now in charge of finding top regulators.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “The mission of our team will be clear: put together the most highly qualified group of successful leaders who will be able to implement our change agenda in Washington,” the transition team announced Friday afternoon.  The surprise moves will sideline Mr. Christie, who had been in charge of the transition for several months. After Mr. Christie dropped out of the Republican primary race, he became a staunch supporter of Mr. Trump. But his standing has fallen recently as two former aides were convicted in the scandal involving the closing of access lanes at the George Washington Bridge in 2013.  In a statement, Mr. Christie said that he is “proud to have run the pre-election phase of the transition team” and said that he looks forward to working with Mr. Pence. “I want to thank President-elect Trump for the opportunity to continue to help lead in this next phase,” Mr. Christie wrote.  Photo  Two people familiar with the reorganization discussion said Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, had wanted to marginalize Mr. Christie, who had come to recognize that he was not in the running to serve as a top adviser in Mr. Trump’s White House. It was unclear whether concerns about his ability to be confirmed might prevent him from being offered a cabinet post.  The changes will also push aside Richard H. Bagger, a former top aide to Mr. Christie who had been working on the transition. The transition team said Mr. Bagger will “return to the private sector” but will remain an adviser.  Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, and Michael T. Flynn, a retired lieutenant general who has been a top campaign supporter, will also serve as vice chairmen of the transition, the transition team said Friday afternoon.  The 16-member advisory committee is made up of four women and 12 men. It will include several members of Congress; Rebekah Mercer, a top Republican donor; Reince Priebus, the chairman of the Republican National Committee; Peter Thiel, a founder of PayPal; Attorney General Pam Bondi of Florida; Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs executive; and Anthony Scaramucci, a hedge-fund manager and Trump supporter. Mr. Bannon will also serve on the committee. A political committee supporting Ms. Bondi received a $25,000 donation from the Trump Foundation, raising questions because it was around the time her office was reviewing allegations against Mr. Trump’s for-profit education programs.  “This team of experienced leaders will form the building blocks of our presidential transition team staff leadership roster, and will work with elected officials and tireless volunteers to prepare our government for the transfer of power on Jan. 20,” Mr. Pence said in a statement.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  There are some indications that the transition effort was slow to start, perhaps the result of Mr. Trump’s upset victory, which caught much of the political world by surprise. At least a few of the people helping organize the search for Mr. Trump were tapped at the last minute, while others have been preparing quietly for weeks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  At the Pentagon and the State Department, officials of the Obama administration said on Thursday that they had not yet heard from Mr. Trump’s transition team about beginning the complex work of transferring responsibilities and authority. A spokesman for the State Department said he did not have “any firm word” on when briefings might begin for designated officials from the new government.  Several people briefed on the transition process described it as somewhat chaotic after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday. His campaign was led by four leadership teams over 18 months, and most of those people were back in view on Thursday, including Corey Lewandowski, the campaign’s first manager. Mr. Lewandowski is said to have told people he would prefer a White House senior adviser role, although he has also been mentioned as a possible Republican National Committee chairman. Mr. Lewandowski resigned on Friday from his role as a CNN political commentator.  Photo  One thing is clear already: those helping Mr. Trump make the decisions are the members of his campaign’s inner circle. On Friday morning at Trump Tower in Manhattan, the president-elect’s closest aides arrived, one by one, waving to the press corps as they entered the elevators.  Trump Tower, the president-elect’s residence, has been transformed into a kind of fortress by the Secret Service and the New York police. The building has been ringed by Jersey barriers and concrete blocks marked with “NYPD.” The Secret Service has set up checkpoints on each end of 56th Street near the tower, and pedestrian access has been restricted around the building.  With just about 70 days left before the inauguration, Mr. Trump’s administration is largely being assembled behind the scenes. But like much else in the nation’s capital, little stays secret for long.  The list of names being mentioned as possibilities for crucial posts in Mr. Trump’s cabinet is growing by the hour, giving official Washington what it craves most: a never-ending parlor game as speculation grows about who might actually get a nod.  The latest to be swept into the speculation is Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, who was mentioned as a possible candidate for secretary of the Treasury by CNBC. Officials with the Trump transition team said they reached out informally to Mr. Dimon, who was clear he did not want the post.  Aides to Mr. Trump have declined to confirm who is on the short list for cabinet posts. And despite the president-elect’s return to Twitter on Thursday night, he has so far said nothing specific about his possible picks.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The critical position of chief of staff — the gatekeeper for the president inside the West Wing — is expected to come down to a choice between Mr. Bannon and Mr. Priebus. The two men spent more than an hour in a meeting on Friday at Trump Tower.  Mr. Giuliani told CNN on Thursday that he might accept an appointment as attorney general, saying that “there’s probably nobody that knows the Justice Department better than me.”  Mr. Mnuchin, who served as Mr. Trump’s campaign finance chairman, is said to be a serious contender for Treasury secretary (though Carl Icahn, the investor, and Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas, have also been mentioned in the news media).
Photo  President-elect Donald J. Trump won the White House with an outsider’s populist promise to “drain the swamp” of Washington.  Now, as he prepares to assume the presidency, an open question remains about the capital he repeatedly spurned: Just how much is he willing to become a part of it?  Mr. Trump, a homebody who often flew several hours late at night during the campaign so he could wake up in his own bed in Trump Tower, is talking with his advisers about how many nights a week he will spend in the White House. He has told them he would like to do what he is used to, which is spending time in New York when he can.  The future first lady, Melania Trump, expects to move to Washington. But the couple’s 10-year-old son, Barron, is midway through a school year in New York, and it is unclear when the move would happen.  The questions reflect what Mr. Trump’s advisers described as the president-elect’s coming to grips with the fact that his life is about to change radically. They say that Mr. Trump, who was shocked when he won the election, might spend most of the week in Washington, much like members of Congress, and return to Trump Tower or his golf course in Bedminster, N.J., or his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach on weekends.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Hanging on to the familiar for presidents-elect and their families is not unusual. There were early questions about whether Michelle Obama would leave Chicago and move to the White House in early 2009 and disrupt her daughters’ school years, but the whole family moved in the day of the inaugural. Mr. Trump’s advisers hold out the possibility that the president-elect may spend more time in the White House as he grows less overwhelmed and more comfortable in the job.  Still, Mr. Trump has spent the last three decades, for the most part, cosseted within Trump Tower. His apartment is on the 58th floor, and a designated elevator takes him from there to his office on the 26th floor.  He wakes at 5 o’clock most mornings, reads The New York Post, The New York Times and a handful of other newspapers, and tunes into the morning television news shows. In the final months of the campaign, he would hang around his apartment until about 10 a.m., joining his aides in the office later.  Mr. Trump’s affection for his penthouse apartment runs deep, as his biographer, Michael D’Antonio, learned when Mr. Trump invited him inside the three-story unit in 2014 for an extended interview.  Photo  Mr. Trump reveled in recalling the challenges required to design and build the apartment, decorated in 24-karat gold and marble in the Louis XIV style, saying he simply wanted to see if such an ambitious undertaking could be accomplished. He described it less as a home than a tribute to his own self-image.  “I really wanted to see if it could be done,” Mr. Trump said at the time, as he showed Mr. D’Antonio around the apartment. “This is a very complex unit. Building this unit, if you look at the columns and the carvings, this building, this unit was harder than building the building itself.”  Yet after meeting with President Obama on Thursday and touring the White House, Mr. Trump, according to two people briefed on his thinking, was taken with that building over all and marveled at the neoclassical architecture and history.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Returning home to Trump Tower from the White House may not be Mr. Trump’s only embrace of the familiar. His aides say he has also expressed interest in continuing to hold the large rallies that were a staple of his candidacy. He likes the instant gratification and adulation that the cheering crowds provide, and his aides are discussing how they might accommodate his demand.  “I think Trump has discovered that these rallies are tremendous opportunities for him to get his message out,” said Christopher Ruddy, chief executive of Newsmax Media, a conservative website. “It’s actually sort of old-fashioned, that you want to actually meet people and press the flesh with him.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Not least, Mr. Trump is finding Twitter a familiar comfort, although it is unclear if he will be the first president to wholly control his own Twitter account once he is in the White House. “I know they’re willing to be unorthodox and want to be true to themselves and not fall into a habit of let’s just follow precedent on what’s been done,” said Mike DuHaime, an adviser to Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who supported Mr. Trump shortly after ending his own White House bid and who stepped back as the head of the president-elect’s transition team on Friday.  Mr. Trump’s aides got him to agree to restrict his use of Twitter in the waning days of his campaign, but on Thursday, his second day as president-elect, Mr. Trump posted the kind of Twitter missive for which he has become known: a message complaining that “professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting.”  “Very unfair!” he wrote.  Mr. Trump checked himself later when he offered a more unifying message: “Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country. We will all come together and be proud.”  For now Mr. Trump remains in Trump Tower receiving congratulations, thanking those who stayed with him and venting to associates his lingering grievances with the news media over coverage of the campaign. He has stayed in touch with reporters at Fox News, checking in to ask about ratings and, as he has done for months, polling people about whom he should put in top jobs.  One constant is that the small cadre of aides and advisers who signed on with the campaign in its early, long-shot days will probably have jobs in the administration, should they want them. They have been told that all of the campaign staff will be taken care of.  “It was such a small operation and it’s such a big government, so it’s very natural they’re going to look to the people who went with them early and stuck with them through thick and thin,” Mr. DuHaime said.
Her campaign said the seemingly positive outcome had only hurt it with voters who did not trust Mrs. Clinton and were receptive to Mr. Trump’s claims of a “rigged system.” In particular, white suburban women who had been on the fence were reminded of the email imbroglio and broke decidedly in Mr. Trump’s favor, aides said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  After leading in polls in many battleground states, Mrs. Clinton told the donors on Saturday, “we dropped, and we had to keep really pushing to regain our advantage, which going into last weekend we had.”  “We were once again up in all but two of the battleground states, and we were up considerably in some that we ended up losing,” Mrs. Clinton said. “And we were feeling like we had to put it back together.”  Presidential candidates have a long history of blaming forces outside their control for their losses. In 2004, John Kerry linked his defeat to a videotape of Osama bin Laden that appeared days before the election, stoking fears about terrorism. In 2012, Mitt Romney told donors he had lost because President Obama had vowed to bestow “gifts” on Democratic special interests groups, namely African-Americans, Hispanics and young people.  Mrs. Clinton’s contention appears to be more rooted in reality — and hard data. An internal campaign memo with polling data said that “there is no question that a week from Election Day, Secretary Clinton was poised for a historic win,” but that, in the end, “late-breaking developments in the race proved one hurdle too many for us to overcome.”  Mrs. Clinton lost narrowly in several battleground states, and by the time all ballots are counted, she appears poised to win the popular vote by more than two million votes.  Still, Mrs. Clinton’s instinct to shun any personal responsibility angered some Democrats. Several donors on the call, while deeply bitter about Mr. Comey’s actions, said they believed that Mrs. Clinton and her campaign had suffered avoidable missteps that handed the election to an unacceptable opponent. They pointed to the campaign’s lack of a compelling message for white working-class voters and to decisions years ago by Mrs. Clinton to use a private email address at the State Department and to accept millions of dollars for speeches to Wall Street.  “There is a special place in hell for Clinton staff, allegedly including Cheryl Mills, that okayed the email server setup,” Jim Manley, a Democratic strategist and former senior aide to Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, wrote on Sidewire, a social media site, referring to a longtime aide and lawyer to Mrs. Clinton.  Mrs. Clinton’s campaign was so confident in her victory that her aides popped open Champagne on the campaign plane early Tuesday. But that conviction, aides would later learn, was based largely on erroneous data showing that young, black and Latino voters and suburban women who had been turned off by Mr. Trump’s comments but viewed Mrs. Clinton unfavorably would turn out for her in higher numbers than they ultimately did.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Exit polls conducted by Edison Research found that among people who said they had decided in the final week before Election Day, 47 percent voted for Mr. Trump and 42 percent for Mrs. Clinton.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  As early as Wednesday morning, aides began to explain to Democrats shaken by the loss that the campaign’s sophisticated data modeling had not taken into account the bombshell F.B.I. announcement.  Mr. Comey’s letters to Congress went against the F.B.I.’s longstanding tradition of avoiding decisions that could affect elections, but he told aides that he felt he had no choice because he had already weighed in on the case so publicly. In July, he had taken the unusual step of publicly announcing that the F.B.I. would not charge Mrs. Clinton.  At the time, she believed she had finally put the issue to rest. And after the final debate on Oct. 19 in Las Vegas, she emerged in such a strong position that she began to focus on campaigning for down-ballot Democrats and planned a campaign stop in traditionally Republican Arizona.  “We felt so good about where we were,” Mrs. Clinton told donors. Before Mr. Comey’s first letter to Congress, she added, “we just had a real wind at our back.”  Mr. Trump seized on the letter, telling voters in Nevada the Saturday before Election Day that “the F.B.I. has reopened its criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton,” and that the matter “would grind government to a halt” should Mrs. Clinton win the White House. The F.B.I.’s examination of the new emails did not in fact reopen the investigation.  Democratic pollsters attributed Mr. Trump’s laser-thin victories in Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin — states that President Obama had won — largely to a drifting of college-educated suburban women to the Republican nominee at the last minute, because of the renewed focus on Mrs. Clinton’s email server.  “We lost with college-educated whites after leading with them all summer,” a Clinton spokesman, Brian Fallon, said on Wednesday. “Five more days of reminders about Comey, and they gravitated back to Trump.”  Before Mrs. Clinton spoke on Saturday, her finance director, Dennis Cheng, thanked the donors on the call, each of whom had raised at least $100,000. The campaign brought in nearly $1 billion to spend heavily on data efforts, to disperse hundreds of staff members to battleground states, and to air television advertisements — only to fall short to Mr. Trump’s upstart operation.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Donors conceded that, ultimately, no amount of money could match Mr. Trump’s crisp pitch, aimed at the economically downtrodden, to “make America great again.”  “You can have the greatest field program, and we did — he had nothing,” said Jay S. Jacobs, a prominent New York Democrat and donor to Mrs. Clinton. “You can have better ads, paid for by greater funds, and we did. Unfortunately, Trump had the winning argument.”  Mrs. Clinton has kept a low profile since her concession speech at a Midtown Manhattan hotel on Wednesday. On Thursday, a young mother with her 13-month-old daughter spotted Mrs. Clinton walking her dogs near her home in Chappaqua, N.Y., posting a photo of the defeated candidate on Facebook that quickly went viral along with the hashtag #ImStillWithHer.  On Friday night, Mrs. Clinton thanked volunteers on a nationwide conference call. “Look, I’m not going to sugarcoat it,” she said, sighing. “These have been very, very tough days.”
Mr. Trump made the comments to The Wall Street Journal in his first interview since winning the election. The newspaper said Mr. Obama had urged the president-elect to reconsider repealing his signature health care law, which Mr. Trump said had become “unworkable.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But in the interview, Mr. Trump said he told the president that he would consider keeping two provisions of the law: the prohibition against insurers denying coverage because of a patient’s pre-existing condition; and the one that allows parents to keep their children on their insurance plans until they turn 26.  The problem: Without a mandate for everyone to buy health insurance, the popular pre-existing condition provision could send insurance companies into a tailspin, because their costs would rise with sicker customers, and that would not be offset by healthy consumers forced to buy insurance.  ‘A lovely call’ from Clinton.  Mr. Trump said in an interview to be shown on “60 Minutes” Sunday that Mrs. Clinton “couldn’t have been nicer” in a congratulatory call she made to concede the election, and that Bill Clinton had complimented him on “one of the most amazing” presidential runs he had ever seen.  “It was a lovely call, and it was a tough call for her — I mean, I can imagine, tougher for her than it would have been for me,” Mr. Trump said. “She couldn’t have been nicer. She just said, ‘Congratulations, Donald, well done.’”  Mr. Trump, who on Thursday said he would seek Mr. Obama’s counsel about the presidency, said he would consider asking for Mr. Clinton’s as well.  Mr. Trump also promised that there would be no lapse in health insurance for millions of Americans covered under the Affordable Care Act when he repeals and replaces the law.  “We’re going to do it simultaneously — it’ll be just fine,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s what I do. I do a good job. You know, I mean, I know how to do this stuff. We’re going to repeal it and replace it. And we’re not going to have, like, a two-day period and we’re not going to have a two-year period where there’s nothing.”  And speaking of olive branches — Mitt Romney  Mr. Trump has quietly reached out to Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee who took an impassioned stand against Mr. Trump during the campaign.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The call came after Mr. Trump’s surprise victory on Tuesday night, according to two people briefed on it, although it was unclear how it went and what was said.  Aides to Mr. Trump and Mr. Romney did not respond to requests for comment.  Gloria Allred eyes the Paula Jones model.  With her eye on the right’s Paula Jones legal crusade of the 1990s, Gloria Allred, the civil rights lawyer representing women who have accused Mr. Trump of sexual assault, is trying to lure the president-elect into a legal battle before he takes office.  Ms. Allred challenged Mr. Trump on Friday to retract his threat to sue his accusers for defaming him and suggested that she might bring a case against him if he refused. She also said that she was prepared to countersue if Mr. Trump made good on the threat.  “President-elect Trump now has the opportunity to act presidential,” Ms. Allred said at a news conference with Summer Zervos, the former contestant on “The Apprentice” who said last month that Mr. Trump tried to seduce her and grabbed her breasts in 2007.  Ms. Allred cited a precedent for suing a sitting president: Ms. Jones.  “Obviously the lawsuit against President Clinton by Paula Jones did proceed while he was in office for actions that were alleged to take place prior to his becoming president,” she said.  The Jones case forced Mr. Clinton into a deposition that resulted in his impeachment on charges of lying under oath about an affair with an intern.  A sobbing Ms. Zervos sat next to Ms. Allred and offered her own solution: “What happened to a good, old-fashioned I’m sorry?”  Mike Pence is in, Chris Christie is out.  Vice President-elect Mike Pence will take the lead on the president-elect’s transition.  Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, who is under a cloud after two aides were convicted of conspiring to shut down traffic on the George Washington Bridge in the so-called Bridgegate scandal, moves aside.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump told advisers that he wanted Mr. Pence’s Washington experience and contacts. An executive committee, which will include members of Congress, will advise Mr. Pence as the process moves forward.  See the full story.  Corey Lewandowski is out at CNN, and (unofficially) back in with Trump.  Corey Lewandowski, who was fired as Mr. Trump’s campaign manager and then went to work for CNN, even as he continued to consult with the campaign, resigned Friday from his political commentator role, the network confirmed.  Photo  Mr. Lewandowski is expected to take a position in the Trump administration.  He was seen in Trump Tower on Wednesday immediately after Mr. Trump’s victory, chatting with senior aides and attending meetings. Mr. Lewandowski did not return calls for comment.  Mr. Lewandowski was viewed as a controversial appointment by the network; he had signed a nondisclosure agreement with Mr. Trump that prevented him from criticizing the candidate publicly, and he was still being paid by the campaign while working for CNN.  Chuck Schumer backs Keith Ellison to head of the D.N.C.  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the incoming Democratic leader, threw his weight behind Representative Keith Ellison of Minnesota on Friday to be the new chairman of the Democratic National Committee, the clearest sign yet that, in defeat, the party will move to the left.  After losing the working-class Rust Belt to Mr. Trump, Democrats could have recruited an industrial-region populist like Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, who represents the Youngstown area. But Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont quickly backed Mr. Ellison, who is black, Muslim and an ardent progressive.  Two former governors, Howard Dean of Vermont and Martin O’Malley of Maryland, also expressed interest Friday in being the party’s new committee chairman.  Photo  Million Woman March brewing  So much for a warm welcome to Washington.  Groups on social media are trying to coordinate a Million Woman March the day after Mr. Trump’s inauguration in protest of the new president. The march will go from the Lincoln Memorial to the White House on Jan. 21 to show “strength, power and courage.” Men are also encouraged to attend.  “No woman is free unless all women are free,” the organizers of the march wrote on the Facebook page where it is being organized.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  State groups for the march have already been formed for people to coordinate travel to the capital. However, some fear that the idea could become a logistical nightmare coming so close to Inauguration Day because of the lack of hotel rooms and the potential for clashes with Trump supporters  Where will Trump live?  Among the president-elect’s most pressing questions as he prepares to take office is where he should live.  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Trump, a provincial homebody who divides his time among golf courses in Florida and New Jersey and his townhouse apartment in Manhattan, is weighing how much time to spend in Washington, according to two people familiar with his deliberations.  One option is spending weekends in New York and most of the week in Washington. Mr. Trump’s wife, Melania, is ultimately planning to move to Washington, according to one person briefed on the discussions, but their 10-year-old son, Barron, is still in school.  Trump’s problems with women continue.  Mr. Trump may be triumphant, but Gloria Allred isn’t done with him yet.  More than 10 women accused Mr. Trump of sexual assault after a video bragging about his groping habits emerged last month. Ms. Allred, the lawyer who has been working with many of the women, does not appear to be letting the president-elect off the hook.  At 2:30 p.m. Eastern time on Friday, she said that she was going to issue a challenge to Mr. Trump at a news conference with one of his accusers who has already come out publicly to tell her story. Ms. Allred would not reveal the name of the woman before the event or share any details of the challenge.  Before the election, Mr. Trump said that the accusers were all lying and that he might sue them. Ms. Allred told ABC News on Thursday that her clients had no plans to sue Mr. Trump at this point, but that they would countersue if he did so.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Harry Reid weighs in.  Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the departing Democratic leader, added his voice to the postelection statements on the president-elect. Unlike most Democrats, he gave no quarter:  The election of Donald Trump has emboldened the forces of hate and bigotry in America. White nationalists, Vladimir Putin and ISIS are celebrating Donald Trump’s victory, while innocent, law-abiding Americans are wracked with fear — especially African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, Muslim Americans, L.G.B.T. Americans and Asian-Americans. Watching white nationalists celebrate while innocent Americans cry tears of fear does not feel like America.  Bernie Sanders to protesters: Chill.  Photo  Some of the anti-Trump protesters who have taken to the streets this week are supporters of Mr. Sanders, and on Friday the former Democratic presidential candidate reminded them that creating chaos and disorder should not be their goal.  Security is beefed up around Fortress Trump.  Trump Tower, the skyscraper on Fifth Avenue and the home base of the president-elect, has become a fortress in the wake of the election.  The lobby, designated a public space by the City of New York, was closed off on Friday morning as Mr. Trump met with advisers. A large police presence surrounded the building.  The tower was built with a special permit more than 30 years ago. The city granted Mr. Trump extra space in exchange for maintaining public access to the lobby.  Peter Thiel joins the transition.  Peter Thiel, the Silicon Valley libertarian who secretly financed a lawsuit against the website Gawker, was named a member of the Presidential Transition Team Executive Committee on Friday afternoon.
Mr. Trump was swept to power in large part by white working-class voters who responded to his vow to restore the voices of forgotten people, ones drowned out by big business and Wall Street. But in his transition to power, some of the most prominent voices will be those of advisers who come from the same industries for which they are being asked to help set the regulatory groundwork.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The president-elect’s spokeswoman, Hope Hicks, declined a request for comment, as did nearly a dozen corporate executives, consultants and lobbyists serving on his transition team, which was outlined in a list distributed widely in Washington on Thursday.  A number of the people on that list are well-established experts with no clear interest in helping private-sector clients. But to critics of Mr. Trump — both Democrats and Republicans — the inclusion of advisers with industry ties is a first sign that he may not follow through on all of his promises.  “This whole idea that he was an outsider and going to destroy the political establishment and drain the swamp were the lines of a con man, and guess what — he is being exposed as just that,” said Peter Wehner, who served in the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George Bush before becoming a speechwriter for George W. Bush. “He is failing the first test, and he should be held accountable for it.”  Transition teams help new presidents pick the new cabinet, as well as up to 4,000 political appointees who will take over top posts in agencies across the government. President Obama, after he was first elected, instituted rules that prohibited individuals who had served as registered lobbyists in the prior year from serving as transition advisers in the areas in which they represented private clients. They were also prohibited, after the administration took power, from lobbying in the parts of the government they helped set up.  “They wanted to make sure that people were not putting their thumb on the scale, or even the perception of that,” said Martha Joynt Kumar, the director of a nonprofit group called the White House Transition Project, which has studied two decades of presidential transitions.  Among the advisers assisting Mr. Trump who have no clear private-sector ties are Brian Johnson, a top lawyer for the House Financial Services Committee, who is helping to pick top staff members for the federal government’s many financial services agencies.  Edwin Meese III, who served as attorney general under Mr. Reagan and is now associated with the Heritage Foundation, the conservative think tank, is helping oversee management and budget issues, along with Kay Coles James, a Bush administration official who now runs an institute that trains future African-American leaders.  Former Representative Mike Rogers, Republican of Michigan, who served as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee and was once a special agent in the F.B.I., is overseeing issues related to national security, including the intelligence agencies and the Department of Homeland Security.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  But in other areas, most notably the energy sector, the transition team advisers are far from independent.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Catanzaro’s client list is a who’s who of major corporate players — such as the Hess Corporation and Devon Energy — that have tried to challenge the Obama administration’s environmental and energy policies on issues such as how much methane gas can be released at oil and gas drilling sites, lobbying disclosure reports show.  He also worked with oil industry players to help push through major legislation goals, such as allowing the export of crude oil. He will now help pick Mr. Trump’s energy team.  Michael McKenna, another lobbyist helping to pick key administration officials who will oversee energy policy, has a client list that this year has included the Southern Company, one of the most vocal critics of efforts to prevent climate change by putting limits on emissions from coal-burning power plants.  Advisers with ties to other industries include Martin Whitmer, who is overseeing “transportation and infrastructure” for the Trump transition. He is the chairman of a Washington law firm whose lobbying clients include the Association of American Railroads and the National Asphalt Pavement Association.  David Malpass, the former chief economist at Bear Stearns, the Wall Street investment bank that collapsed during the 2008 financial crisis, is overseeing the “economic issues” portfolio of the transition, as well as operations at the Treasury Department. Mr. Malpass now runs a firm called Encima Global, which sells economic research to institutional investors and corporate clients.  Mr. Eisenach, as a telecom industry consultant, has worked to help major cellular companies fight back against regulations proposed by the F.C.C. that would mandate so-called net neutrality — requiring providers to give equal access to their networks to outside companies. He is now helping to oversee the rebuilding of the staff at the F.C.C.  Dan DiMicco, a former chief executive of the steelmaking company Nucor, who now serves on the board of directors of Duke Energy, is heading the transition team for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. Mr. DiMicco has long argued that China is unfairly subsidizing its manufacturing sector at the expense of American jobs.  In his campaign, Mr. Trump promised to take steps to close the so-called revolving door, through which government officials leave their posts and then personally profit by helping private companies reap rewards from policies or programs they had recently managed.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In October, declaring that “it’s time to drain the swamp in Washington,” he promised to institute a five-year ban in which all executive branch officials would be prevented from lobbying the government after they left. He has also promised to expand the definition of a lobbyist, so it includes corporate consultants who do not register as lobbyists but still often act like one.  Bruce F. Freed, the president of a nonprofit group called the Center for Political Accountability, which is pressing major corporations to be more transparent about their political spending, said Mr. Trump’s transition team had sent an unfortunate signal to his followers.  “This is one of the reasons you had such anger among voters — people rigging the system, gaming the system,” Mr. Freed said. “This represents more of the same.”
It did not name President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, but that appeared to be the intention.  The statement from Mr. Clapper and the Department of Homeland Security, which is primarily responsible for defending the country against sophisticated cyberattacks, said the intelligence agencies were less certain who was responsible for “scanning and probing” online election rolls in states around the country. It said that those “in most cases originated from servers operated by a Russian company,” but stopped short of alleging the Russian government was responsible for those probes.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The announcement came only hours after Secretary of State John Kerry called for the Russian and Syrian governments to face a formal war-crimes investigation over attacks on civilians in Aleppo and other parts of Syria. Taken together, the developments mark a sharp escalation of Washington’s many confrontations with Moscow this year.  For weeks, aides to Mr. Obama have been debating whether to openly attribute the cyberattacks to Russia, and as recently as Wednesday the director of the National Security Agency, Adm. Michael Rogers, refused to publicly accuse Moscow.  But with little more than a month to go before the presidential election, one senior administration official said that Mr. Obama was “under pressure to act now,” in part because a declaration closer to Election Day would appear to be political. Two days ahead of the second presidential debate, the announcement also puts the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, more on the defensive over his assertion last month that Mr. Putin is a better leader than Mr. Obama.  In the first debate, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Mr. Trump’s Democratic rival, blamed Russia for the cyberattacks on the Democratic National Committee, but Mr. Trump said there was no evidence that Russia was responsible; he suggested it could have been the Chinese or “somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds.”  Soon after the administration accused the Russians of hacking into the committee, WikiLeaks published hacked emails from John D. Podesta, the Clinton campaign chairman.  In a Twitter message Friday evening, Mr. Podesta said that “I’m not happy about being hacked by the Russians in their attempt to throw the election to Donald Trump.’’  WikiLeaks has released troves of hacked Democratic emails, but has not revealed their source.  A major question is how Mr. Obama might respond without setting off an escalating cyberspace conflict with Russia between now and Nov. 8. One possibility is that the announcement itself — an effort to “name and shame” — will deter further action.  But Mr. Obama’s aides have assembled a range of possible responses, from using economic sanctions to covert action against Russian targets, potentially including the computers used in the hack.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The official accusation against Russia comes after anonymous American intelligence officials told The New York Times in July that they had “high confidence” that the Russian government was behind the hack of the D.N.C., which led to the resignation of Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the Florida Democrat, as committee chairwoman, amid evidence that the committee was favoring Mrs. Clinton over her competitor for the party nomination, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.  The months of subsequent silence frustrated some in Congress, and several weeks ago the top Democrats on the House and Senate intelligence committees, Adam Schiff and Dianne Feinstein, both of California, said Russia and its leaders were responsible, citing classified briefings.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Mr. Schiff, who had urged the Obama administration to name Russia and better prepare American voters for the possibility of interference between now and the election, on Friday praised the decision “to call out Russia on its malevolent interference in our political affairs.”  “I hope this will establish a deterrent to further meddling,” he said. “I don’t think the Russians have decided yet how much they plan to continue their interference, so I think this attribution is very timely. We’re also encouraging the administration to work with our European partners, who have been the subject of even worse meddling, to coordinate a response to this.”  Mr. Schiff said he was afraid Russian hackers might attempt to delete or manipulate voter rolls, causing long lines at the polls and delays in counting votes because people would be forced to cast provisional ballots. (Voting machines themselves are not linked to the internet, so it is effectively impossible to hack them in a systematic way and change the outcome, specialists say.)  But as “profound” as that concern is, Mr. Schiff said, he and others see as “the most grave risk” something else: Russia could take emails it has already stolen, manipulate them to create a false impression that a candidate has done something outrageous or illegal, and cause them to be published online shortly before the election.  That, he said, “could have an election-altering effect.”  Federal officials are trying to help states plug holes in their internet defenses for election management systems. One thing they will not do before the election is pronounce such systems “critical infrastructure,” as the secretary of Homeland Security, Jeh Johnson, proposed in August.  Mr. Johnson’s notion provoked a backlash from conservatives. Republicans like Brian P. Kemp, the secretary of state in Georgia, and Jon A. Husted, his counterpart in Ohio, accused the Obama administration of overreaching, saying it was trying to carry out a federal takeover.  Administration officials said that the idea of declaring elections systems critical infrastructure is dead for now, lest it discourage states from working with the federal government.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Our focus right now, in the remaining days before Nov. 8, is to encourage states to come forward and request our assistance,” Mr. Johnson said in a recent interview.  The department has offered states two kinds of help, both for free: a remote cyber “hygiene” scan of their servers by department officials who look for known vulnerabilities and can recommend patches, and a more intensive on-site analysis by a team of computer security specialists.  The department’s emphasis on voluntary measures has met with mixed success: So far, 28 states have accepted that offer, the department said, but it declined to name them. Officials with election agencies in the large swing states of Ohio, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania said they were participating. (Pennsylvania is particularly important because its electronic voting machines lack a paper audit trail for recounts.)  Florida, another large swing state, is not participating in this program, but officials in the office of its secretary of state said they had already been working with federal partners.  Still, while the number of participants has been slowly creeping up, the window is closing. A Homeland Security official said it takes about a week to complete the necessary paperwork to permit the department to begin the work, and that the more intensive on-site effort takes about two weeks.  That suggests that soon after the middle of October, it will be too late to provide any help to late takers.  The fact that 22 states are not as yet participating does not necessarily mean all of them are vulnerable in ways that participants are not. Kay Stimson, a spokeswoman for the National Association of Secretaries of State, noted that some states had already been taking cybersecurity measures that are likely equivalent to what the department is offering.
The F.B.I.’s inquiries into Russia’s possible role continue, as does the investigation into the emails involving Mrs. Clinton’s top aide, Huma Abedin, on a computer she shared with her estranged husband, Anthony D. Weiner. Mrs. Clinton’s supporters argue that voters have as much right to know what the F.B.I. has found in Mr. Trump’s case, even if the findings are not yet conclusive.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “You do not hear the director talking about any other investigation he is involved in,” Representative Gregory W. Meeks, Democrat of New York, said after Mr. Comey’s letter to Congress was made public. “Is he investigating the Trump Foundation? Is he looking into the Russians hacking into all of our emails? Is he looking into and deciding what is going on with regards to other allegations of the Trump Organization?”  Mr. Comey would not even confirm the existence of any investigation of Mr. Trump’s aides when asked during an appearance in September before Congress. In the Obama administration’s internal deliberations over identifying the Russians as the source of the hacks, Mr. Comey also argued against doing so and succeeded in keeping the F.B.I.’s imprimatur off the formal findings, a law enforcement official said. His stance was first reported by CNBC.  Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, responded angrily on Sunday with a letter accusing the F.B.I. of not being forthcoming about Mr. Trump’s alleged ties with Moscow.  “It has become clear that you possess explosive information about close ties and coordination between Donald Trump, his top advisers, and the Russian government — a foreign interest openly hostile to the United States, which Trump praises at every opportunity,” Mr. Reid wrote. “The public has a right to know this information.”  F.B.I. officials declined to comment on Monday. Intelligence officials have said in interviews over the last six weeks that apparent connections between some of Mr. Trump’s aides and Moscow originally compelled them to open a broad investigation into possible links between the Russian government and the Republican presidential candidate. Still, they have said that Mr. Trump himself has not become a target. And no evidence has emerged that would link him or anyone else in his business or political circle directly to Russia’s election operations.  At least one part of the investigation has involved Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s campaign chairman for much of the year. Mr. Manafort, a veteran Republican political strategist, has had extensive business ties in Russia and other former Soviet states, especially Ukraine, where he served as an adviser to that country’s ousted president, Viktor F. Yanukovych.  But the focus in that case was on Mr. Manafort’s ties with a kleptocratic government in Ukraine — and whether he had declared the income in the United States — and not necessarily on any Russian influence over Mr. Trump’s campaign, one official said.  In classified sessions in August and September, intelligence officials also briefed congressional leaders on the possibility of financial ties between Russians and people connected to Mr. Trump. They focused particular attention on what cyberexperts said appeared to be a mysterious computer back channel between the Trump Organization and the Alfa Bank, which is one of Russia’s biggest banks and whose owners have longstanding ties to Mr. Putin.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  F.B.I. officials spent weeks examining computer data showing an odd stream of activity to a Trump Organization server and Alfa Bank. Computer logs obtained by The New York Times show that two servers at Alfa Bank sent more than 2,700 “look-up” messages — a first step for one system’s computers to talk to another — to a Trump-connected server beginning in the spring. But the F.B.I. ultimately concluded that there could be an innocuous explanation, like a marketing email or spam, for the computer contacts.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The most serious part of the F.B.I.’s investigation has focused on the computer hacks that the Obama administration now formally blames on Russia. That investigation also involves numerous officials from the intelligence agencies. Investigators, the officials said, have become increasingly confident, based on the evidence they have uncovered, that Russia’s direct goal is not to support the election of Mr. Trump, as many Democrats have asserted, but rather to disrupt the integrity of the political system and undermine America’s standing in the world more broadly.  The hacking, they said, reflected an intensification of spy-versus-spy operations that never entirely abated after the Cold War but that have become more aggressive in recent years as relations with Mr. Putin’s Russia have soured.  A senior intelligence official, who like the others spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a continuing national security investigation, said the Russians had become adept at exploiting computer vulnerabilities created by the relative openness of and reliance on the internet. Election officials in several states have reported what appeared to be cyberintrusions from Russia, and while many doubt that an Election Day hack could alter the outcome of the election, the F.B.I. agencies across the government are on alert for potential disruptions that could wreak havoc with the voting process itself.  “It isn’t about the election,” a second senior official said, referring to the aims of Russia’s interference. “It’s about a threat to democracy.”  The investigation has treated it as a counterintelligence operation as much as a criminal one, though agents are also focusing on whether anyone in the United States was involved. The officials declined to discuss any individual targets of the investigation, even when assured of anonymity.  As has been the case with the investigation into Mrs. Clinton, the F.B.I. has come under intense partisan political pressure — something the bureau’s leaders have long sought to avoid. Supporters of both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump have been equally impassioned in calling for investigations — and even in providing leads for investigators to follow.  Mr. Reid, in a letter to Mr. Comey in August, asserted that Mr. Trump’s campaign “has employed a number of individuals with significant and disturbing ties to the Russia and the Kremlin.” Although Mr. Reid cited no evidence and offered no names explicitly, he clearly referred to one of Mr. Trump’s earlier campaign advisers, Carter Page.  Mr. Page, a former Merrill Lynch banker who founded an investment company in New York, Global Energy Capital, drew attention during the summer for a speech in which he criticized the United States and other Western nations for a “hypocritical focus on ideas such as democratization, inequality, corruption and regime change” in Russia and other parts of the former Soviet Union.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Page responded with his own letter to Mr. Comey, denying wrongdoing and calling Mr. Reid’s accusations “a witch hunt.” In an interview, he said that he had never been contacted by the F.B.I. and that the accusations were baseless and purely partisan because of his policy views on Russia. “These people really seem to be grasping at straws,” he said.  Democrats have also accused another Republican strategist and Trump confidant, Roger Stone, of being a conduit between the Russian hackers and WikiLeaks, which has published the emails of the Democratic National Committee and Mr. Podesta, the Clinton campaign manager. Mr. Stone boasted of having contacts with the WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange, and appeared to predict the hacking of Mr. Podesta’s account, though he later denied having any prior knowledge.  Mr. Stone derided the accusations and those raised by Michael J. Morell, a former C.I.A. director and a Clinton supporter, who has called Mr. Trump “an unwitting agent of the Russian Federation.” In an article on the conservative news site Breitbart, Mr. Stone denied having links to Russians and called the accusations “the new McCarthyism.”
No one else on Mr. Trump’s national security team comes with the pedigree of General Flynn, who was director of the Defense Intelligence Agency until 2014, and no one has brought the same level of vitriol.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “What’s happening with the U.S.? Where’s the leadership? That’s what I want to see change,” he said in an interview. “Am I angry or frustrated? Yeah. Who wouldn’t be?”  He is angry about the “political correctness” that makes President Obama and Mrs. Clinton shy from even uttering the phrase “radical Islamic terrorism” — a phrase the general makes a point of using, often — never mind tackling the very real threat he believes it poses. He is angry about what he sees as the lack of accountability represented by Mrs. Clinton and her emails. He is angry that the United States, under both Republicans and Democrats, keeps blundering into wars that seem only to make enemies of what should be natural allies, like Russia, in the fight against Islamist militancy.  It has left friends and critics alike wondering where General Flynn’s ideas end and Mr. Trump’s begin.  Photo  “I wasn’t surprised to hear him being outspoken when he retired,” David Hall, a retired Navy Reserve officer and federal prosecutor, said of General Flynn, with whom he worked in the Pentagon. “He was always willing to speak up when he was frustrated or the process wasn’t going well.”  “But going overtly political really surprised me,” Mr. Hall said. “I’d never heard him make any political remarks, or even a remark that I could view as a disguised political remark.”  General Flynn said he had become involved in the Trump campaign out of the same patriotic duty that led him to a 33-year career in the military. But for all the harsh talk, he can strike surprisingly bipartisan notes. He said, for example, that he would have advised Mrs. Clinton had she reached out to him.  “Whatever the outcome of this election, I would like to think that people would still say, ‘Look, this guy has some expertise,’” he said.  Unless Mr. Trump wins, that is unlikely to happen. General Flynn these days is as much of an outcast as one can be in the Washington national security establishment, much of which has lined up behind Mrs. Clinton.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  That seems just fine with General Flynn. He has little patience for the Republican neoconservatives who led the United States into Iraq during the George W. Bush administration — “they’ve gotten us into mess after mess for the wrong reasons” — and he sees the Democratic national security establishment as no better.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Hillary Clinton pushed to get us into Libya. Is she a neocon on the Democratic side?” he said. “We’re in too many conflicts that just seem to be perpetual.”  He is also not uncritical of the Republican nominee. He called the recording of Mr. Trump talking about grabbing and kissing women “disgusting,” and he said he and others had advised Mr. Trump to take a tougher line with Russia before the previous debates, especially when it came to the hacking of the Democratic National Committee and Clinton campaign staff members.  The United States should be cultivating Russia as an ally to fight Islamist militancy, he said, but “do I want Russia to influence our election? Absolutely not.” He added, “They need to be told in no uncertain terms to knock it off.”  But General Flynn is dismissive of former colleagues in the military who have privately and publicly urged him to dial back his support for Mr. Trump.  “They’re saying, ‘You’re using your title in politics.’ So? You’re not using your titles, admirals and generals, to get on corporate boards?” General Flynn said.  “I care deeply about this country,” he continued. “I actually found it very disrespectful that those guys would come out and counsel me publicly.”  In any case, General Flynn never saw himself as part of their club. He did not come to the military with the West Point pedigree of many of his peers — he graduated from the Army’s Reserve Officers Training Corps program at the University of Rhode Island — and his roots were scrappier than those of most generals, he said, describing his family as “definitely lower middle class.”  During his time in the Army, General Flynn earned a reputation for being outspoken and unconventional and, in the years after the Sept. 11 attacks, for being unusually good at taking apart terrorist networks. He helped reshape the Joint Special Operations Command at the height of the war in Iraq, ran military intelligence in Afghanistan during the Obama administration’s troop surge and was named director of the Defense Intelligence Agency by Mr. Obama in 2012.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But his term at the agency was cut short after two years. His detractors say that he lacked the experience to manage an operation with 20,000 employees, and that his efforts to overhaul what he saw as an ineffective bureaucracy left the agency a chaotic mess. His proponents say he was done in by an old guard that was being sidelined.  General Flynn maintains that he was fired for insisting that Al Qaeda and other militant Islamists were regrouping in the Middle East and for refusing to fall in line with an administration that wanted to bask in the glow of having killed Osama bin Laden. His view of the threat posed by Islamist militancy has hardened in the two years since he was forced into retirement.  Yet General Flynn also talks of the need to strengthen relationships with predominantly Muslim countries and to better understand their cultures. Muslim countries are eager to play a bigger role in the fight against Islamist militancy, he said. What they are lacking is American leadership, he said, and Mr. Trump can provide it.
Anti-corruption officials there say the payments earmarked for Mr. Manafort, previously unreported, are a focus of their investigation, though they have yet to determine if he actually received the cash. While Mr. Manafort is not a target in the separate inquiry of offshore activities, prosecutors say he must have realized the implications of his financial dealings.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “He understood what was happening in Ukraine,” said Vitaliy Kasko, a former senior official with the general prosecutor’s office in Kiev. “It would have to be clear to any reasonable person that the Yanukovych clan, when it came to power, was engaged in corruption.”  Mr. Kasko added, “It’s impossible to imagine a person would look at this and think, ‘Everything is all right.’”  Video  Mr. Manafort did not respond to interview requests or written questions from The New York Times. But his lawyer, Richard A. Hibey, said Mr. Manafort had not received “any such cash payments” described by the anti-corruption officials.  Mr. Hibey also disputed Mr. Kasko’s suggestion that Mr. Manafort might have countenanced corruption or been involved with people who took part in illegal activities.  “These are suspicions, and probably heavily politically tinged ones,” said Mr. Hibey, a member of the Washington law firm Miller & Chevalier. “It is difficult to respect any kind of allegation of the sort being made here to smear someone when there is no proof and we deny there ever could be such proof.”  Mysterious Payments  The developments in Ukraine underscore the risky nature of the international consulting that has been a staple of Mr. Manafort’s business since the 1980s, when he went to work for the Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos. Before joining Mr. Trump’s campaign this spring, Mr. Manafort’s most prominent recent client was Mr. Yanukovych, who — like Mr. Marcos — was deposed in a popular uprising.  Photo  Before he fled to Russia two years ago, Mr. Yanukovych and his Party of Regions relied heavily on the advice of Mr. Manafort and his firm, who helped them win several elections. During that period, Mr. Manafort never registered as a foreign agent with the United States Justice Department — as required of those seeking to influence American policy on behalf of foreign clients — although one of his subcontractors did.  It is unclear if Mr. Manafort’s activities necessitated registering. If they were limited to advising the Party of Regions in Ukraine, he probably would not have had to. But he also worked to burnish his client’s image in the West and helped Mr. Yanukovych’s administration draft a report defending its prosecution of his chief rival, Yulia V. Tymoshenko, in 2012.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Whatever the case, absent a registration — which requires disclosure of how much the registrant is being paid and by whom — Mr. Manafort’s compensation has remained a mystery. However, a cache of documents discovered after the fall of Mr. Yanukovych’s government may provide some answers.  The papers, known in Ukraine as the “black ledger,” are a chicken-scratch of Cyrillic covering about 400 pages taken from books once kept in a third-floor room in the former Party of Regions headquarters on Lipskaya Street in Kiev. The room held two safes stuffed with $100 bills, said Taras V. Chornovil, a former party leader who was also a recipient of the money at times. He said in an interview that he had once received $10,000 in a “wad of cash” for a trip to Europe.  Photo  “This was our cash,” he said, adding that he had left the party in part over concerns about off-the-books activity. “They had it on the table, stacks of money, and they had lists of who to pay.”  The National Anti-Corruption Bureau, which obtained the ledger, said in a statement that Mr. Manafort’s name appeared 22 times in the documents over five years, with payments totaling $12.7 million. The purpose of the payments is not clear. Nor is the outcome, since the handwritten entries cannot be cross-referenced against banking records, and the signatures for receipt have not yet been verified.  “Paul Manafort is among those names on the list of so-called ‘black accounts of the Party of Regions,’ which the detectives of the National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine are investigating,” the statement said. “We emphasize that the presence of P. Manafort’s name in the list does not mean that he actually got the money, because the signatures that appear in the column of recipients could belong to other people.”  The accounting records surfaced this year, when Serhiy A. Leshchenko, a member of Parliament who said he had received a partial copy from a source he did not identify, published line items covering six months of outlays in 2012 totaling $66 million. In an interview, Mr. Leshchenko said another source had provided the entire multiyear ledger to Viktor M. Trepak, a former deputy director of the domestic intelligence agency of Ukraine, the S.B.U., who passed it to the National Anti-Corruption Bureau.  Photo  The bureau, whose government funding is mandated under American and European Union aid programs and which has an evidence-sharing agreement with the F.B.I., has investigatory powers but cannot indict suspects. Only if it passes its findings to prosecutors — which has not happened with Mr. Manafort — does a subject of its inquiry become part of a criminal case.  Individual disbursements reflected in the ledgers ranged from a few hundred dollars to millions of dollars. Of the records released from 2012, one shows a payment of $67,000 for a watch and another of $8.4 million to the owner of an advertising agency for campaign work for the party before elections that year.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “It’s a very vivid example of how political parties are financed in Ukraine,” said Daria N. Kaleniuk, the executive director of the Anti-Corruption Action Center in Kiev. “It represents the very dirty cash economy in Ukraine.”  Offshore Companies  While working in Ukraine, Mr. Manafort had also positioned himself to profit from business deals that benefited from connections he had gained through his political consulting. One of them, according to court filings, involved a network of offshore companies that government investigators and independent journalists in Ukraine have said was used to launder public money and assets purportedly stolen by cronies of the government.  Photo  The network comprised shell companies whose ultimate owners were shielded by the secrecy laws of the offshore jurisdictions where they were registered, including the British Virgin Islands, Belize and the Seychelles.  In a recent interview, Serhiy V. Gorbatyuk, Ukraine’s special prosecutor for high-level corruption cases, pointed to an open file on his desk containing paperwork for one of the shell companies, Milltown Corporate Services Ltd., which played a central role in the state’s purchase of two oil derricks for $785 million, or about double what they were said to be worth.  “This,” he said, “was an offshore used often by Mr. Yanukovych’s entourage.”  The role of the offshore companies in business dealings involving Mr. Manafort came to light because of court filings in the Cayman Islands and in a federal court in Virginia related to an investment fund, Pericles Emerging Markets. Mr. Manafort and several partners started the fund in 2007, and its major backer was Mr. Deripaska, the Russian mogul, to whom the State Department has refused to issue a visa, apparently because of allegations linking him to Russian organized crime, a charge he has denied.  Mr. Deripaska agreed to commit as much as $100 million to Pericles so it could buy assets in Ukraine and Eastern Europe, including a regional cable television and communications company called Black Sea Cable. But corporate records and court filings show that it was hardly a straightforward transaction.  Photo  The Black Sea Cable assets were controlled by a rotating cast of offshore companies that led back to the Yanukovych network, including, at various times, Milltown Corporate Services and two other companies well known to law enforcement officials, Monohold A.G. and Intrahold A.G. Those two companies won inflated contracts with a state-run agricultural company, and also acquired a business center in Kiev with a helicopter pad on the roof that would ease Mr. Yanukovych’s commute from his country estate to the presidential offices.  A Disputed Investment  Mr. Deripaska would later say he invested $18.9 million in Pericles in 2008 to complete the acquisition of Black Sea Cable. But the planned purchase — including the question of who ended up with the Black Sea assets — has since become the subject of a dispute between Mr. Deripaska and Mr. Manafort.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In 2014, Mr. Deripaska filed a legal action in a Cayman Islands court seeking to recover his investment in Pericles, which is now defunct. He also said he had paid about $7.3 million in management fees to the fund over two years. Mr. Deripaska did not respond to requests for comment.  Mr. Manafort’s lawyer, Mr. Hibey, disputed the account of the Black Sea Cable deal contained in Mr. Deripaska’s Cayman filings, and said the Russian oligarch had overseen details of the final transaction involving the acquisition. He denied that Mr. Manafort had received management fees from Pericles during its operation, but said that one of Mr. Manafort’s partners, Rick Gates, who is also working on the Trump campaign, had received a “nominal” sum.  Court papers indicate that Pericles’ only deal involved Black Sea Cable.  Mr. Manafort continued working in Ukraine after the demise of Mr. Yanukovych’s government, helping allies of the ousted president and others form a political bloc that opposed the new pro-Western administration. Some of his aides were in Ukraine as recently as this year, and Ukrainian company records give no indication that Mr. Manafort has formally dissolved the local branch of his company, Davis Manafort International, directed by a longtime assistant, Konstantin V. Kilimnik.  At Mr. Manafort’s old office on Sofiivska Street, new tenants said they had discovered several curiosities apparently left behind, including a knee X-ray signed by Mr. Yanukovych, possibly referring to tennis matches played between Mr. Manafort and Mr. Yanukovych, who had spoken publicly of a knee ailment affecting his game.  There was another item with Mr. Yanukovych’s autograph: a piece of white paper bearing a rough sketch of Independence Square, the site of the 2014 uprising that drove him from power.
Now the question has emerged in the United States election campaign whether Mr. Putin has opted — directly or covertly — to throw Russia’s support behind Mr. Trump. The conclusion by cybersecurity experts that Russian intelligence agencies breached the Democratic National Committee and released thousands of emails on the eve of the party’s convention prompted accusations from Democrats and some Republicans that Mr. Trump was a kind of “Siberian candidate,” bolstered from abroad to undermine the nation.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Given Donald Trump’s well-known admiration for Putin and his belittling of NATO, the Russians have both the means and the motive to engage in a hack of the D.N.C. and the dump of its emails prior to the Democratic convention,” Rep. Adam Schiff of California, a Democrat who is the ranking member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, said in a statement on Monday.  “That foreign actors may be trying to influence our election — let alone a powerful adversary like Russia — should concern all Americans of any party,” he added.  Video  Mr. Trump dismissed the idea as a joke, and his campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, called it “crazy” in remarks broadcast on CNN. “I don’t even know what you’re talking about,” he said.  Just four years ago, the Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney called Russia the No. 1 geopolitical threat to the United States, a remark that was criticized at the time by Democrats but that seemed to anticipate the souring of relations after the annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014.  As her campaign approached, Mrs. Clinton, too, sharpened her tone on the threat Mr. Putin posed, distancing herself in her book “Hard Choices” from a “reset” widely seen as a failure. Now it is Mr. Trump who sees — though not always — a new era of cooperation, “because Putin likes me,” as he put it on Twitter.  Mr. Trump’s dabbling in business in the country dates to the Soviet era, when he visited Moscow in 1987 at the invitation of the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Yuri Dubinin, who had mentioned at a lunch in New York that his daughter had admired Trump Tower. “He actually suggested that we make a similar statement in Moscow,” Mr. Trump said at the time.  Mr. Trump’s plans for a Trump Tower in Russia never came to fruition, but his interest in the country as a potential investment and marketing opportunity never waned entirely, as his decision to stage the Miss Universe pageant at a concert hall in one of Moscow’s deluxe shopping centers, Crocus City, demonstrated.  As his campaign took shape this year, he turned to advisers who shared his views on Russia. Mr. Manafort has had extensive financial and political dealings with business executives in Russia and Ukraine.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Beginning in 2005, he worked as a political strategist in Ukraine for Viktor Yanukovych and his Party of Regions, which struggled to regain power after his first election as president in late 2004 was overturned as fraudulent, in what became known as the Orange Revolution. According to one of several cables disclosed by WikiLeaks in 2010, Mr. Yanukovych told the American ambassador at the time that he intended to “build Regions into a party that had a platform and policies.”  Photo  “Doing so was important for the development of democracy in Ukraine, he asserted,” according to the cable. Mr. Yanukovych won the presidency in 2010, only to be ousted in the political upheaval that prompted the Russian intervention in Crimea and later in eastern Ukraine.  Mr. Manafort also had business investments in the region, some of which were detailed in a lawsuit filed in New York in 2011 by Mr. Yanukovych’s rival, Yulia Tymoshenko. Although the suit was dismissed, it detailed connections with a Ukrainian gas middleman, Dmytro Firtash, and a reputed kingpin of the Russian mob, Semyon Y. Mogilevich, as well as with another Russian tycoon, Oleg Deripaska.  In the lawsuit, Ms. Tymoshenko claimed that Mr. Manafort had helped Mr. Firtash in a project to use illicit proceeds from gas deals to buy and redevelop the former Drake Hotel on Park Avenue in Manhattan. The United States tried to extradite Mr. Firtash from Austria, but the request was turned down in 2015.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Adrian Karatnycky, an expert on Ukraine at the Atlantic Council, said that he viewed Mr. Manafort as a canny strategist and businessman. “I don’t see Manafort going in as an agent of Russian imperialism, but of personal opportunism,” he said.  Another adviser to Mr. Trump’s campaign, Carter Page, also lived and worked in Russia, serving as a consultant with Gazprom, the state-owned energy giant. In July, he delivered a graduation speech at the New Economic School in Moscow in which he warned that hostility between the United States and Russia, reminiscent of the Cold War, was a mistake.  While Mr. Putin has scrupulously avoided endorsing either candidate in the United States campaign, the tenor of coverage by the state news media has clearly favored Mr. Trump. He is portrayed as a populist break from the past, while from Russia’s point of view, Mrs. Clinton embodies the worst aspects of an aggressive, antagonistic American establishment.  “They don’t really expect much from a Clinton presidency other than continued confrontation, while they view a Trump presidency as a window for improved relations,” said Vladimir Frolov, the foreign affairs columnist for the online magazine Slon.ru.  Video  A report on Sunday on the weekly television program Vesti Nedeli cited an interview with The New York Times in which Mr. Trump suggested that American protection for the Baltic nations would not be automatic if he were elected, despite the collective defense clause in the NATO treaty.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Such a practical look at the alliance shocked the American establishment, for whom NATO has long been a cult, as it is the main instrument of the U.S. for dominance in Europe,” the television report asserted, showing photographs of American headlines calling Mr. Trump an agent and lap dog of Mr. Putin.  In December, when Mr. Trump’s candidacy was still relatively young, Mr. Putin praised him, when asked, as flamboyant and talented. In a more recent appearance, at the St. Petersburg International Economic Forum, he welcomed Mr. Trump’s stated goal of improving relations. “What’s wrong with that?” Mr. Putin said, prompting applause from an audience that included business executives eager to resume smooth economic relations.  Mr. Trump has boasted about Mr. Putin’s flattery, but his remarks on Twitter have been far from consistently positive toward the Russian leader. “What do you think Obama will do when Putin seizes Alaska?” he posted in March 2014, days after the annexation of Crimea. A month later, he quoted an evident admirer: “President Trump, now that would make Putin wet himself!”  An irony for Russia, of course, is that interference in another country’s political process is precisely what Mr. Putin has accused the United States of doing for at least the last 12 years.  Matthew Rojansky, the director of the Kennan Institute at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, said that while it was plausible that Russian intelligence agencies were behind the breach and leaked the emails, it did not necessarily follow that Moscow had a favorite.  He said the leak more likely would reflect a goal “to stir the pot,” as Russia has done with support of insurgent parties in Europe. Mr. Putin, he said, had to be aware that direct intervention could well backfire with American voters, especially those in swing states like Ohio and Pennsylvania with roots in Poland, Ukraine or the Baltics.  “Could Putin really be that stupid?” he asked.
Photo  WASHINGTON — What is striking about Donald J. Trump’s latest effusion of admiration for Russia’s stony-faced leader, Vladimir V. Putin, is how similar it is to the way Mr. Putin is portrayed in Russia: as a necessary foil for an aggressive and flawed American leadership.  Interviewed at an NBC candidates forum Wednesday night, Mr. Trump offered no account of Mr. Putin’s achievements, except perhaps for noting an 82 percent approval rating from a polling agency now under legal threat as a “foreign agent.” Nor did Mr. Trump outline much of a vision for working with him if he became president, beyond pondering how wonderful it would be if Russia and the United States could join forces against the Islamic State.  Instead he recited a litany of perceived slights or disrespect that President Obama has endured on the world stage, including the awkward arrival ceremony on his most recent visit to China for the Group of 20 gathering. The message, Mr. Trump said, is that Mr. Putin earns more respect now than Mr. Obama.  “He’s been a leader,” he said of Mr. Putin, “far more than our president has been a leader.”  Not surprisingly, Hillary Clinton, campaigning to be Mr. Obama’s Democratic successor, sharply criticized the remarks on Thursday. So did some fellow Republicans, including the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, who listed many of the reasons Mr. Putin amounts to an adversary of the United States, not a potential ally.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Mr. Trump’s view of the Russian president is not uncommon among those who have used him as a measure of Mr. Obama’s standing in the world — or more generally the United States’ standing as the world’s dominant superpower.  In Russia, it is at the heart of the depiction of Mr. Putin as the bulwark against a conspiring United States. It underlies Mr. Putin’s attractiveness to nationalist parties in Europe dismayed by what they view as feckless leadership in the face of economic difficulties and the challenge of immigration. And it is shared by those in the Middle East who see Russia’s intervention in Syria on behalf of its embattled president, Bashar al-Assad as decisive, and not hesitant and convoluted, as American policy has been.  In 2013, when Mr. Putin brokered an agreement to collect and destroy most of Syria’s chemical weapons, thus averting American-led airstrikes that Mr. Obama had threatened, Matt Drudge of the conservative Drudge Report called Mr. Putin, perhaps archly, the “leader of the free world.” The editors of Forbes magazine ranked him as the most influential world leader, a purely symbolic honorific he has lost and regained since — but one that is trumpeted inside Russia.  “I think he genuinely admires Putin as a strongman who gets things done,” said Angela E. Stent, a professor at Georgetown University, referring to Mr. Trump.  What achievements of Mr. Putin’s does Mr. Trump admire? “Everybody pays attention to him,” Ms. Stent said, adding that Russia’s military operations in Syria since last year have put him back in the center of international diplomacy.  Russia’s critics — and certainly the White House — would dispute Mr. Putin’s accomplishments, noting the corrupted, kleptocratic economy and a stunted political system that has marginalized genuine opposition, at times violently. There is also the 2014 annexation of Crimea, which, while popular in Russia, has led to international sanctions and diplomatic isolation that has eroded Russia’s economy and reputation.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Ms. Stent, author of “The Limits of Partnership,” a history of the downward slide in relations between Russia and the United States, noted that at the Group of 20 gathering in Australia two years ago, Mr. Putin had to sit alone at lunch — and left early.  Mr. Trump emphasized in his interview with NBC’s Matt Lauer that he did not necessarily endorse the political system Mr. Putin has erected, but again used the line of questioning to talk about the United States being a divided country because of comparatively weak leadership.  Nina Khrushcheva, a professor of international studies and associate dean at the New School, noted a shared characteristic in the two men: that of a tough authoritarian leader, or put another way, a schoolyard tough refusing to back down from a fight (an image Mr. Putin himself has used to describe his childhood).  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump on Wednesday noted a widely circulated photograph of Mr. Obama and Mr. Putin at the latest Group of 20 meeting, locked in what clearly seems to be an icy stare.  “Wanting to be a firm and powerful leader who can stare people down like Putin is clearly something Trump aspires to,” Ms. Khrushcheva said.  Mr. Trump, as before, ignored the many issues that divide the United States and Russia, and it is far from clear that a Trump presidency, pleasantries aside, would augur a significant warming of relations between the two countries.  Mr. Trump instead repeated an offhand comment the Russian had for Mr. Trump. In unscripted remarks in December Mr. Putin used a Russian adjective — “yarki” — that Mr. Trump has said means brilliant, though it can also mean colorful or flamboyant. “If he says great things about me, I’m going to say great things about him,” he said.  After referring to the photograph of the staring match, Mr. Trump noted that Russia wanted to defeat the Islamic State as badly as the United States does. “If we have a relationship with Russia, wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could work together on it and knock the hell out of ISIS,” he said.  Mr. Putin would certainly welcome a more agreeable administration in Washington, though he has offered no concessions that might encourage a change in policy in Syria or anywhere else. But his views of the American election and the two main candidates seem more nuanced than the favorable treatment Mr. Trump receives in the Kremlin-controlled news media.  In an interview with Bloomberg ahead of the Group of 20 meetings, Mr. Putin derided the “shock tactics” of Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton. “I don’t think they are setting the best example,” he said.
Photo  Donald J. Trump suggested on Monday that Hillary Clinton was too “tough” in her language about Russia, and said that if he won the election, he might meet with President Vladimir V. Putin before being sworn in.  Mr. Trump made the remarks in an interview with the conservative radio host Michael Savage, who repeatedly affirmed Mr. Trump’s recent claims that the mainstream media was attempting to thwart him.  Mr. Trump told Mr. Savage that the United States’ current leadership, as well as Mrs. Clinton, was too aggressive against Mr. Putin.  “They insult him constantly — I mean, no wonder he can’t stand Obama and Hillary Clinton,” Mr. Trump said, calling the tensions a “very serious problem.”  “It is the worst situation that we’ve had with Russia since the end of the Cold War, by far,” he said.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Trump added that “she shouldn’t be talking so tough” about Russia, and he suggested, as he has repeatedly in recent months, that Russia could be an ally in fighting the Islamic State.  “We have Putin, who has no respect for Obama at all — doesn’t like him, and doesn’t respect him,” Mr. Trump told Mr. Savage, calling the difficulties “a really catastrophic situation here, I’ll be honest with you.”  He added, “If I win on Nov. 8, I could see myself meeting with Putin and meeting with Russia prior to the start of the administration.”  Democrats have often assailed Mr. Trump for his comments about Mr. Putin, whom he has characterized as a stronger leader than President Obama.  Mr. Trump, who has declined to make his tax returns public, has denied that he has business interests in Russia.  But he has also refused to acknowledge that the United States intelligence officials have attributed the hacking of the Democratic National Committee to Russian hackers who they said must have had the approval of the Kremlin’s top leaders.  But beyond the potential meeting with Mr. Putin, Mr. Trump did not offer a strategy for dealing with Moscow.
Mrs. Clinton’s nomination has done little to reverse women’s perceptions of gender discrimination in America, and in many cases, their views differ sharply from men’s.  Photo  Forty-eight percent of women — but just 35 percent of men — think there are more advantages in being a man than in being a woman in society today. Majorities of women with a college degree, those who identify as Democrats, those younger than 30, those with household incomes of at least $100,000, and black women all say men hold an advantage.  Asked to name the most important problem facing women today, women cited issues related to gender inequality in the workplace, primarily pay, more than any other. Gender divisions were particularly pronounced on issues related to the workplace. Three-quarters of women said women in the United States are paid less than men doing similar work, while 55 percent of men held the same opinion.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “What I see that as a reflection of is that we have a done a good job on the awareness issue,” said Teresa Boyer, executive director of the Center for Women and Work at Rutgers University. “The negative is that it still exists.”  Women were also more likely than men to say there is “a lot” of sexual harassment in most American workplaces today — fully one-quarter said so, compared with 18 percent of men. But the same number of men and women, 53 percent, acknowledge that there is “some.” Younger women and African-American women are most likely to say there is a lot of sexual harassment.  A poll of women conducted for Virginia Slims in 1994 found virtually the same result: Three-quarters of women said there was some sexual harassment or a lot in the workplace.  WOMEN IN THE WORKPLACE In the U.S., women doing similar work as men are paid: About the same as men Less than men More than men 74 % 1 22 WOMEN 55 % 4 38 MEN How much sexual harassment goes on in most American workplaces today? A lot Some Not much None 25 % 53 14 2 WOMEN 18 % 53 22 2 MEN Do you see yourself as ever being a leader in business or government? Yes No 31 % 68 WOMEN 46 % 52 MEN  By a ratio of almost two to one — 51 percent to 27 percent — American women think more progress has been made in overcoming sexism than racism in the past 20 years.  But Joyce Coleman, an African-American from Southfield, Mich., and a retired human resources consultant, said in a follow-up interview that there had been less progress toward ending sexism.  “I’m 71 years old and I was born in Mississippi, so I’ve experienced racism from several different quarters,” Mrs. Coleman said. She said that although racism had not disappeared, there is “a lot more tolerance,” and she could not say the same about sexism because of “things that continue to happen to women in the workplace.”  The nationwide poll was conducted from Sept. 9 through 13 on landlines and cellphones with 1,770 adults and has an overall margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.  Men are significantly more likely than women to see themselves as ever being leaders in business or government. Nearly half of men say they could achieve this while less than a third of women do. African-American women are much more likely than white women to see themselves as leaders (40 percent versus 26 percent). Likewise, women younger than 45 and those with more education or higher incomes are the more likely than other women to think this high level of leadership is achievable.  GENDER AND THE PRESIDENTIAL RACE Is Hillary Clinton a good role model for women, or not? Yes No 56 % 40 WOMEN 51 % 44 MEN In general, because she is a woman, most Americans judge Hillary Clinton: More harshly Less harshly No effect 43 % 7 46 WOMEN 29 % 11 54 MEN Donald Trump respects women: A lot Some Not much Not at all 17 % 25 21 34 WOMEN 22 % 28 23 21 MEN  Carla Lytle, a 52-year-old African-American, manages election officials at the Election Commission in Shelby County, Tenn., and is one of the survey participants who sees herself as a leader.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “Initially I was a stay-at-home mom, and I have a large family: eight children,” Ms. Lytle said. “I home-schooled them. I think the leadership skills and things I learned at home I was able to bring to the workplace. It’s just hard work and being able to be structured and organized and sustain a vision: having a vision and working for something.”  Women rate success at work as much more important than their appearance in determining how they feel about themselves, but significantly more think that society places a higher emphasis on looks than on their success at work. Fifty-three percent of women say their appearance is very important in how they view themselves, while 71 percent say society judges them by their physical appearance. African-American women are far more likely to rate their appearance as very important.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Fifty-six percent of women think Mrs. Clinton is a good role model for women. By contrast, in 2007, during her first campaign for the presidency, a Times/CBS News poll found that 70 percent considered her a good role model.  Willa Speiser, 68, a freelance editor in Warwick, N.Y., plans to vote for her but does not consider her a role model.  “I think she’s achieved much of what she has because of who she married,” Ms. Speiser said. “I don’t think she’s a good role model for women because it’s not a life path that a lot of women have available to them.”  Significantly more men than women consider marriage to be very important. While 58 percent of men said being married is very important, just 47 percent of women overall said so.  Most women with household incomes over $100,000, those who identify as Republicans and those between the ages of 30 and 45 said marriage is very important to them. But in roughly equal numbers (almost three-quarters), both men and women said being a parent was very important to them. Women under the age of 30 were least likely to rate parenthood as very important, but still, 59 percent hold this belief.  Nancy Brownell, a 74-year-old retired teacher in Houston, said: “I’ve been married 47 years, and I have a good marriage. But it was another time. Marriage was another thing on your list. You couldn’t at that time go to a hotel and check in by yourself. When I went to college, they locked us into the dorms at 11 at night.” Today, she said, “I think a woman can do quite well on her own.”
Mr. Giuliani is now back on the national political stage, serving as one of Donald J. Trump’s most prominent advisers and most vocal defenders. Once an outspoken advocate of a bipartisan immigration overhaul, he is championing a candidate who has vowed to build an “impenetrable physical wall” on the country’s southern border and severely restrict immigration from Muslim countries.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  He has assumed his new role with apparent relish, embracing some of the most controversial tactics of Mr. Trump’s campaign, including its penchant for unsubstantiated assertions: Last week, Mr. Giuliani said that Mr. Trump had abandoned his insistence that President Obama was born outside the United States, even though Mr. Trump has never done so publicly.  Mr. Giuliani has also questioned Hillary Clinton’s mental and physical health, buttressing his charges with debunked internet memes. “Go online and put down ‘Hillary Clinton illness,’ take a look at the videos for yourself,” he said last month.  It has been a startling next — and perhaps last — act for a 72-year-old politician once nicknamed America’s Mayor, and noteworthy enough for a handful of editorial pages to call him “unhinged.”  But the Trump campaign has given Mr. Giuliani, a former federal prosecutor, the chance to mold a potential president, and to do battle with an old rival he deeply dislikes, one who he bitterly insists received special treatment from the F.B.I.  A Trump victory could open the door for Mr. Giuliani to return to public office, perhaps as head of the Department of Homeland Security or even Secretary of State.  But his ardent support for Mr. Trump could, alternatively, come at a cost to his legacy, as it has put Mr. Giuliani starkly at odds with other right-of-center Republican figures who have described the nominee as a dangerous threat to the nation and have refused to support him.  This is a source of deep concern to a large cadre of former Giuliani aides, people who recall him as the steely, compassionate leader of post-9/11 New York, and as the mayor who presided over a historic reduction in crime in the decade before — a period when he also denounced the most extreme elements of the Republican Party, advocated stricter gun control and signed a landmark domestic partnerships bill.  “That’s what makes it so painful to watch,” said Rick Wilson, an adviser to Mr. Giuliani’s 1997 re-election effort who is now advising a third-party candidate for president, Evan McMullin. “Trump is the kind of person that Rudy in a lot of ways would have laughed off the stage.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  In a telephone interview, Mr. Giuliani acknowledged that a large segment of people who have worked with him over the last three decades have recoiled from Mr. Trump’s candidacy. Among other things, his former aides have expressed concerns about Mr. Trump’s questioning of the impartiality of a judge because of his Mexican heritage, and belittling the Muslim parents of a slain Army officer.  “They don’t know him as well as I do,” Mr. Giuliani said, adding, “There’s not a racist bone in his body.”  The real Donald Trump, he said, “is a guy without these prejudices.”  Since Mr. Giuliani’s speech at the Republican convention in July, when he fulminated about the dangers of a Clinton presidency in tones that struck many as over the top, he has been a frequent presence by Mr. Trump’s side, trying to steady the Republican candidate’s wobbly campaign.  He accompanied Mr. Trump to Mexico on Aug. 31, and then introduced him before his immigration speech the same night in Phoenix, even donning a white “Make Mexico Great Again Also” hat for the occasion. Mr. Giuliani has played a significant role behind the scenes, too, urging Mr. Trump to tone down his remarks and rethink his immigration plan. He also took control of a private campaign round-table discussion of national security recently, in which he addressed the room as often as Mr. Trump did, according to someone in attendance.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Former Giuliani aides discern other imprints on the Trump campaign: Mr. Trump’s policy addresses about school reform and his recent outreach to black voters in Detroit, they said, contained echoes of Mr. Giuliani’s mayoral re-election campaign in 1997, when he argued with black New Yorkers that Democrats had let them down.  Mr. Giuliani still has his defenders.  “Rudy Giuliani presided over the single greatest transformation of a major American city in our history,” said Anthony V. Carbonetti, a longtime adviser. “It sickens me to hear people diminish that simply because they disagree with his politics.”  Mr. Giuliani said that he did not share all of Mr. Trump’s views, but that on the issues that mattered most, the economy and foreign policy, they were in sync. He said he believed that Mr. Trump had made adjustments in his approach, including on immigration.  On paper, at least, the two men have much in common. Both are relatively socially liberal and twice-divorced products of neighborhoods outside Manhattan, where they eventually gained fame. Both are pugnacious, with hearty appetites for conflict and for attention from a news media they often condemn as biased.  But there are significant differences. Mr. Giuliani is a well-read student of history who absorbs himself in the details of policy debates. Mr. Trump skims briefing books and prefers to get his information from cable news.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Mr. Giuliani waited until the New York primary to declare his support for Mr. Trump, then did so cautiously, saying he was troubled by some of the candidate’s more personal attacks on his rivals. But once Mr. Trump won the nomination, Mr. Giuliani’s tentative embrace became a bear hug.  The relationship between the two dates back decades, to when Mr. Trump was actively developing real estate in New York.  Mr. Trump was not a major donor to Mr. Giuliani’s campaigns, but in 1999, the mayor came under fire for a deal that allowed Mr. Trump to build a 72-story condominium tower on the East Side of Manhattan, far bigger than the zoning code had contemplated. That same year, Mr. Giuliani spoke at the funeral of Mr. Trump’s father, Fred, calling him “a giant.”  Mr. Trump lent his airplane to Mr. Giuliani at least twice in the immediate aftermath of Sept. 11. He let the mayor and Gov. George E. Pataki fly to Washington for President George W. Bush’s first address to Congress. There was a catch, though: The plane had been grounded at La Guardia Airport after the attacks. Mr. Trump asked Mr. Giuliani’s aides to help get the restriction lifted. They did.  Mr. Trump has sat in Mr. Giuliani’s box at Yankee Stadium, and each attended the other’s most recent wedding: Mr. Giuliani to Judith Nathan, Mr. Trump to Melania Knauss.  Now, they share a common adversary.  Mr. Giuliani had planned to run against Mrs. Clinton for the Senate in 2000, but dropped out of the race after a prostate cancer scare.  “He didn’t have a lot of use for either of the Clintons,” said Jerome Hauer, who was Mr. Giuliani’s emergency management director but later had a falling out with him. Mr. Hauer recalled having to persuade the mayor to let him give a briefing to President Bill Clinton in 1998.  “I think there’s a significant animus towards Hillary, almost a vendetta,” Mr. Hauer said.  Mr. Giuliani said he never considered running for president this year, despite a political climate that could have been more favorable to him. He also brushed aside speculation that he covets a cabinet position, saying his decision to support Mr. Trump was animated by his concern for the country’s security.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  Nevertheless, watching Mr. Giuliani vouch for and cheer on the divisive Mr. Trump has been jarring for those who recall the former mayor’s denunciation of Patrick J. Buchanan’s anti-immigrant presidential campaign in 1996, and his leadership of a badly shaken city in September 2001, when he grimly warned that “the number of casualties will be more than any of us can bear, ultimately.”  It is those moments that many of Mr. Giuliani’s former aides hope he will be remembered for, not his full-throated support for Mr. Trump.  “Rudy is being called on to defend the indefensible,” John Avlon, the editor in chief of The Daily Beast and a former Giuliani speechwriter, said recently on CNN. “It doesn’t reflect his best self, but it should not define him in the totality of his career.”
Photo  Some pantsuits were white, in tribute to the dresses of the suffragists. Others were mismatched or borrowed. Many were fished out of the back of a closet, along with a memory of a long-lost job or a somber occasion.  These suits were redeployed by thousands of American women on Election Day, when taking a photo of yourself in a pantsuit and posting it to the “secret” Facebook group Pantsuit Nation became the digital equivalent of slapping an “I Voted” sticker on a lapel.  “They’re coming in at about 1,000 every few minutes,” Libby Chamberlain, the founder of the group, said of the social media posts. “We have over 20,000 posts that are waiting to be approved. We have dozens of moderators and they can’t keep up.”  “It’s intense,” she added.  Ms. Chamberlain, 33, created Pantsuit Nation to support Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee, less than three weeks ago. Since then, more than 2.5 million people have joined the group — which is invitation only — and have reported donating more than $216,000 through the Pantsuit Nation fund-raising drive. But even that growth didn’t prepare the group’s organizers for the explosive activity on Tuesday.  People, mainly women, posted photos of their daughters wearing “Future President” T-shirts or creating an “H” with their bodies. They posted images and memories of their pioneering grandmothers, like an early airplane pilot. Many thanked the group for the virtual support it provided when they went to their polling places in mostly red states. These users called themselves “blue dots.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “There was a post from an 18-year-old who went to vote with her 91-year-old grandmother,” Ms. Chamberlain said. “It’s a montage of every sappy thing you’ve ever seen about America. Only these are real people, in their own voices, and I think it’s a picture of the real diversity in the country.”  A member of Pantsuit Nation, who says she runs the digital operations for Hillary for America, shared a message from Mrs. Clinton to the group: “I wanted to take a moment to thank you for your support from the bottom of my heart. This election hasn’t been easy: It’s been long, hard-fought, and at times it made us question who we are as Americans.  “For some of you, it’s been difficult to feel like you could wear your support on your sleeve — and that’s why this community has been such a special place.”  She added: “I’m honored and humbled to have all of you with me, but I’m even prouder to see this community represent the best of America.”  Ms. Chamberlain is a mother of two young children who has two part-time jobs in school administration in rural Maine. She said she had formed the Facebook group to create a space to celebrate the historic possibility of the first female president. The response, she said, reflected a need for positivity during a cynical, often dispiriting, campaign.  Kristin Williams, 33, a member from Raleigh, N.C., said in a phone interview: “It did sort of revive my spirit. I didn’t believe in ‘election depression’ until I realized it was happening to me. I’ve cut ties with my family, or rather, they’ve cut ties with me.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Ms. Williams, an assistant professor of sociology, described her family as “very conservative.” She dressed in a pantsuit and a bandanna, like Rosie the Riveter, when she went to vote. She posted a selfie on the group’s Facebook page with the caption, “I walked through a sea of Trump supporters to vote today, proudly and emotionally, for her.”  Ms. Williams added in the interview: “Someone thanked me, in the comments, for being a strong woman. How often do we say that to one another, in real life? That’s been the biggest benefit. This group brings out the supportive side of women.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The stated goal of Pantsuit Nation is to express support for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, but it has also served as a forum to discuss the issues raised by the rhetoric of her opponent, Donald J. Trump. Many members have embraced the tropes of the Trump campaign, like “Bad Hombres” and “Nasty Woman.”  “This Nasty Woman proudly voted in Forsyth County, Georgia, one of the few Republican strongholds in metro Atlanta!” wrote Fatu Forna, 40, a physician and chief of department at a large medical organization. “I am a proud immigrant, doctor, author, taxpayer, mother and, over all, Nasty Woman!”  Ms. Forna, originally from Sierra Leone, wore a gray pantsuit and a pink shirt on Tuesday. She said in an interview: “I sat in my car and took a picture. I’m proud to be a nasty woman because a lot of times women in my position are minimized for being powerful; they are put down.”  Ms. Chamberlain said that she didn’t have any data on the demographics of the group members, but added that the posts revealed a broad range in age, ethnicity and even political leanings.  “We have lifelong Republicans who are voting for Hillary, lefty liberals and everything in between,” she said, adding, “People are chiming in from around the world — expats, or people saying we’re supporting you, thank you for supporting Hillary, because it affects us, too.”  The group has spawned unofficial splinter groups, including Pantsuit Nation Canada, that Ms. Chamberlain said revealed future possibilities.  “People are doing it on their own, unsanctioned,” she said. “I love the idea that this could influence policy in the future, and to do that we need a network of regional and state groups.”  In the meantime, she has her hands full just trying to get the Election Day posts up, she said. Often, despite the quantity of them, she said, one would make her stop and stare.  Many women who posted were not in stereotypical pantsuits. “Does this count as a pantsuit?” asked a member in New Jersey.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  She was wearing military fatigues.
Photo  WASHINGTON — An airport encounter this week between Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch and former President Bill Clinton has welled into a political storm, with Republicans asserting that it compromised the Justice Department’s politically sensitive investigation into Hillary Clinton’s email practices while she was secretary of state.  The Obama administration declined to say on Thursday whether the meeting between Ms. Lynch and Mr. Clinton, in Phoenix on Monday night, was appropriate. The press secretary, Josh Earnest, said that the investigation of Mrs. Clinton would be free of political influence and that he would leave it to the attorney general to explain the meeting.  Ms. Lynch said the meeting with Mr. Clinton was unplanned, largely social and did not touch on the email investigation. She suggested that he walked uninvited from his plane to her government plane, which were both parked on a tarmac at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport.  “He did come over and say hello, and speak to my husband and myself, and talk about his grandchildren and his travels and things like that,” Ms. Lynch said at a news conference in Los Angeles on Wednesday, where she was promoting community policing. “That was the extent of that. And no discussions were held into any cases or things like that.”  That did not mollify Republican lawmakers, who said the meeting raised questions about the integrity of the government’s investigation. Since last summer, the F.B.I. has been investigating whether Mrs. Clinton or her aides violated laws on the protection of classified material by using a private email address and server in the Clintons’ home in Chappaqua, N.Y.  Related Coverage  The F.B.I. is expected to make a recommendation to the Justice Department in the coming weeks. While some legal experts said they believed criminal indictments in the case were unlikely, the investigation continues to cast a shadow over Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign.  “In light of the apparent conflicts of interest, I have called repeatedly on Attorney General Lynch to appoint a special counsel to ensure the investigation is as far from politics as possible,” Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas and a member of the Judiciary Committee, said in a statement on Thursday.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  “This incident does nothing to instill confidence in the American people that her department can fully and fairly conduct this investigation, and that’s why a special counsel is needed now more than ever,” he said.  First Draft Political news and analysis from the staff of The New York Times. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, seized on the incident, describing it in a radio interview as a “sneak” meeting and saying it exposed the rigged nature of the process.  Even some Democrats expressed uneasiness with the appearance the meeting created.  “I do agree with you that it doesn’t send the right signal,” Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, said in response to a question on CNN’s “New Day” program. Ms. Lynch “has generally shown excellent judgment and strong leadership of the department, and I’m convinced that she’s an independent attorney general. But I do think that this meeting sends the wrong signal, and I don’t think it sends the right signal. I think she should have steered clear, even of a brief, casual, social meeting with the former president.”  At the White House, Mr. Earnest was asked repeatedly about the propriety of the meeting. He defended what he said was Ms. Lynch’s long record of independence as a federal prosecutor. But he stopped short of saying the administration viewed the meeting as appropriate.  “I wasn’t there for the meeting,” Mr. Earnest said, “but the attorney general was, and she was asked a direct question about it, and she answered it. I think that is consistent with everybody’s expectations.”
Photo  CNN has severed ties with the Democratic strategist Donna Brazile, after hacked emails from WikiLeaks showed that she shared questions for CNN-sponsored candidate events in advance with friends on Hillary Clinton’s campaign.  Ms. Brazile, a veteran political analyst for the network, was already on leave from CNN since becoming interim chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee. On Monday, CNN said it had accepted her formal resignation on Oct. 14.  “We are completely uncomfortable with what we have learned about her interactions with the Clinton campaign while she was a CNN contributor,” Lauren Pratapas, a network spokeswoman, said in a statement.  “CNN never gave Brazile access to any questions, prep material, attendee list, background information or meetings in advance of a town hall or debate,” Ms. Pratapas wrote.  The announcement followed the release of new emails on Monday that included a message from Ms. Brazile on the day before a CNN-sponsored Democratic primary debate in Flint, Mich., in March. Her subject line: “One of the questions directed to HRC tomorrow is from a woman with a rash.”  Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Sign-up for free NYT Newsletters Morning Briefing News to start your day, weekdays Opinion Today Thought-provoking commentary, weekdays Cooking Delicious recipes and more, 5 times a week Race/Related A provocative exploration of race, biweekly Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up Receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.  “Her family has lead poison and she will ask what, if anything, will Hillary do as president to help the ppl of Flint,” Ms. Brazile wrote to John D. Podesta, the Clinton campaign chairman, and Jennifer Palmieri, the candidate’s communications director.  At the debate the next night, two women asked similar questions of Mrs. Clinton and her opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  The episode has cast a harsh spotlight on the cable news practice of paying partisan political operatives to appear as on-air commentators. Like Ms. Brazile, these guests can offer a plugged-in viewpoint on the day’s events, but they often also parrot campaign talking points and, as in this case, create potential ethical conflicts.  CNN has already faced criticism over its hiring of Corey Lewandowski, Donald J. Trump’s former campaign manager, as a paid contributor, even as he remains an informal adviser to the candidate.  Ms. Brazile’s infraction, however, may be more damaging. Her sharing of questions with a candidate would seem to undercut the impartiality of the event and, as a CNN contributor, potentially reflect poorly on the network, which received big ratings, and thus profits, from primary debates and town halls.  In an interview on Monday, Ms. Brazile said she offered her resignation to CNN when emails surfaced earlier in October that showed her telling Ms. Palmieri: “From time to time I get the questions in advance.”  “I didn’t want CNN to get involved in this WikiLeaks controversy,” Ms. Brazile said by telephone. “I didn’t want to put CNN in the middle of what has been a real invasive cyberintrusion.”  Ms. Brazile, who said she has changed her mobile phone number twice because of harassment related to the leaked emails, said CNN “never, never” shared advance questions with her ahead of debates or town hall-style events.  Asked to explain her emails with the Clinton campaign, she said she “seeks as much information as I can possibly get” ahead of a televised program, in part to prepare for her own on-air responses.  “I often talk to everybody before an event,” she said. “I try to learn as much as I can, share as much as I can.”  Advertisement Continue reading the main story  But Ms. Brazile declined to elaborate on the exchanges in question, saying: “I am not going to verify, deny, confirm or even try to make sense out of stolen emails that were hacked.”  Her departure from CNN quickly became fodder on the campaign trail. Mr. Trump, at a rally in Grand Rapids, Mich., on Monday, seized on Ms. Brazile’s messages to attack Mrs. Clinton and press his case that the news media is biased against him.  “Speaking of draining the swamp, Donna Brazile did it again,” he said. “WikiLeaks today, she gave the questions to a debate to Hillary Clinton. And that was from a couple of weeks ago. Happened again, but this time far worse. She gave the questions to a debate to Hillary Clinton.”  If Mrs. Clinton received questions in advance from Ms. Brazile, Mr. Trump asked, “why didn’t she report it?”  The Clinton campaign has declined to verify the authenticity of the emails.  Ms. Brazile’s discussions with the Clinton campaign first raised concerns earlier in October when emails released by WikiLeaks showed she had contacted Ms. Palmieri to share a question about the death penalty. Ms. Brazile said the question would be asked at a coming CNN town hall.  In the Monday interview, Ms. Brazile said her experience over the last few weeks had been “very invasive.”  “It’s like you get hit three times,” Ms. Brazile said. “You get hit with the hack, with the fact that your information has been stolen, and then you get hit with trying to make sense of the nonsense.”
President-elect Donald Trump's appointment of his chief of staff is "imminent," his campaign manager and transition team senior adviser Kellyanne Conway told reporters late Saturday.  TRUMP ADVISERS BACK DEREGULATION, PRIVATIZED SOCIAL SECURITY  A significant White House job, the chief of staff likely will set the tone for Trump's White House and serve as a main communications channel to Capitol Hill and Cabinet agencies.  Conway said the announcement would not come Saturday, but added, "It’s imminent. Soon."  Trump is said to be considering Steve Bannon, his campaign chairman and a conservative media executive, and Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus for the job. Neither has significant policy experience, though Priebus is well-liked in Washington and has ties with lawmakers.  TRUMP NOW HAS ACCESS TO NATION'S MOST VALUABLE INTELLIGENCE  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  "I think Chairman Priebus has expressed an interest in the position. There are several people being considered. And it’s Mr. Trump’s decision ultimately," Conway said.  Conway is also said to be in the mix for a senior job. She is a veteran Republican pollster who formed a strong rapport with the candidate after taking the helm of his campaign in the general election. Conway said a possible future job in the White House was "not a big priority" for her.  Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, who emerged as Trump's frequent travel partner and close aide, is on the short list for several positions, including attorney general.  Fox News has learned that Trump has had phone conversations with 2012 presidential candidate Mitt Romney, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and current Ohio Gov. John Kasich, although it's not clear what roles they could be asked to serve.  Kasich's call was described as cordial and brief. He and Bush called the president-elect. Trump called Romney on Tuesday night.  Trump on Friday announced he'd assigned Vice President-elect Mike Pence to lead the transition team, replacing New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, a loyal adviser for much of the presidential campaign.  Christie will still be involved in the transition, joining a cluster of other steadfast Trump supporters serving as vice chairmen: former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions and Giuliani.  Fox News' Serafin Gomez and The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Hillary Clinton has offered a couple of private but candid explanations about why she lost her White House bid, telling high-dollar fundraisers Saturday that FBI announcements about a second probe into her emails from her time as secretary of state were too damaging.  Clinton said, "Our analysis is that Comey’s letter raised doubts that were groundless and baseless..." and "stopped our momentum," a DNC fundraising source who was on the call told Fox News.  Clinton made the remark on a roughly 30-minute conference call with Democrats who raised more than $100,000, according to Politico.  The former State Department leader lost in a surprising defeat to Republican nominee Donald Trump -- a first-time candidate who essentially trailed in almost every major poll for the entire campaign.  FBI Director James Comey told Congress in an Oct. 30 letter that the agency was looking at emails found in an unrelated case that could be related to a closed FBI case specifically about the Clinton emails.  Clinton suggested her campaign’s internal poll numbers plunged after the letter but nevertheless rebounded, a person on the Saturday call told Politico.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  However, she said the second Comey letter, three days before Election Day, saying that she had essentially been cleared in the unrelated case, awakened Trump voters.  The FBI investigated Clinton using a private email server system while secretary of state. Comey said some of the emails included classified information and that she was “extremely careless” in her action. But he concluded the case in July without recommending criminal charges.  Clinton on Thursday told her campaign staff that she had “stepped in it” by saying half of Trump’s supporters were “deplorables,” according to The New York Times.  She and her campaign essentially defended the remark by saying she regretted saying “half” of the supporters were “racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic" people.  Fox News' Serafin Gomez contributed to this report.
During his triumphant presidential campaign, Donald Trump renounced Republican orthodoxy on a Social Security overhaul.  "We're not going to hurt the people who have been paying into Social Security their whole life," Trump declared, calling the payment of promised benefits "honoring a deal."  But the man heading the Trump transition team's Social Security effort? Michael Korbey, a former lobbyist who has spent much of his career advocating for cutting and privatizing the program.  "It's a failed system, broken and bankrupt," Korbey said as a lobbyist in the mid-1990s. Korbey acknowledged that some of the changes his group backed would hurt retirees, but "our constituents aren't just senior citizens," he told a newspaper in 1996.  A decade later, as a senior adviser to the Social Security Administration, Korbey was an advocate for the George W. Bush administration's failed attempt to privatize Social Security.  Korbey is just one example of apparent discord between Trump's populist economic platform and the people who have been put in charge of planning to carry it out. While there are some true Washington outsiders on the team -- such as Dan DiMicco, a former steel industry executive who is Trump's transition head for the office of U.S. Trade Representative -- many of the players are familiar from the Republican economic establishment.  The mix indicates a strong leaning toward rolling back much of the Obama administration's post-financial collapse changes, and a general posture toward deregulation.  The team will not necessarily carry over into the Trump administration -- though members of past transition teams often have. Instead, they are in charge of putting together hiring recommendations, working with outgoing appointees and laying the groundwork for administration's opening months.  Bill Walton, one of the two people overseeing the economic transition effort, is the former chief executive for Allied Capital, a financial firm that was sold after nearly failing during the financial crisis. He is both a trustee for the Heritage Foundation and a senior fellow at another conservative organization, the Discovery Institute.  David Malpass, who is overseeing both the Treasury Department staffing and part of the broader economic issues portfolio, was Bear Stearns' chief economist in the years leading up to its collapse. In August 2007, as U.S. economic growth ground to a halt and the debt markets shuddered, he wrote a Wall Street Journal op-ed titled "Don't Panic About the Credit Market."  "Housing and debt markets are not that big a part of the U.S. economy, or of job creation," the piece declared, predicting continued economic growth and dismissing concerns that recent growth had been dependent on the housing bubble.  Eight months later, Bear Stearns collapsed, unable to withstand the toxic combination of overheated home prices and shoddily assembled debt that Malpass dismissed. But Malpass landed on his feet, founding a consulting firm called Encima Partners.  Since then, he's faulted both the Federal Reserve's monetary response to the financial crisis and regulations intended to prevent future such calamities.  In a 2010 National Review article titled "Chris Dodd's Big, Misguided Bill," Malpass argued against the value of creating the consumer financial protection bureau, writing that the Obama administration should "streamline and concentrate" existing consumer protection regulators, a step that he said "would result in a reduction of government jobs."  In Paul Atkins, Trump has found a leading proponent of the theory that government should get out of the financial industry's way.  Appointed to the Securities and Exchange commission in July 2002 at the height of the era's corporate accounting scandals, he was considered the most conservative member of the SEC during his tenure. Atkins objected to stiff penalties imposed on companies for allegedly fraudulent conduct, contending that they don't effectively deter crime.  And in 2005, he defended the practice of backdating stock options -- a practice in which executives paid themselves for fictitious outperformance in their companies' stocks. Numerous executives went to jail for those activities -- but Atkins caused a stir by saying he found nothing objectionable about it.  In the years that led up to the financial crisis, Atkins warned of dangers posed by "enacting regulations that supplant the market's judgment."  Among the initiatives he successfully backed at the SEC was a loosening of leverage restrictions on investment banks, a step that allowed firms like Bear Stearns and Lehman brothers to borrow more money and invest it in mortgage-backed securities.  Atkins resigned in August of 2008, and now runs a financial services industry consulting firm. But he has maintained his vigorously pro-market stance.  "We all know that overregulation can "kill the goose that laid the golden egg," he said in a 2012 speech opposing the regulation of money market funds.
An 18-year-old is expected to take office in January as Forrest County's next District 1 election commissioner.  Local media reports that teenager Tyler Wood beat out incumbent Charlie Phillips during the Tuesday balloting.  Wood, who's a student at Pearl River Community College in Hattiesburg, says he'll be up to the job despite his age. He says it's not about how old you are, it's about having the "integrity, the knowledge and the experience" to do the job.  Wood says he got interested in the job while helping out during Forrest County's recent primaries.  Gwen Wilks, the county's circuit clerk, says the unofficial results show Wood with about 300 votes more than his opponent. Affidavit ballots are still being counted but she said it's unlikely to change the results.
President-elect Donald Trump will now have access to the most authoritative and highly classified intelligence produced by the U.S. government, Fox News has learned.  Two intelligence sources confirmed that the President’s Daily Brief, or PDB, is now available to Trump – after the White House, before Tuesday’s election, had directed that the winner have full access to the material, to ensure a smooth transition.  The sources told Fox News they do not anticipate the briefings will begin until next week at the earliest.  The PDB is like a highly classified newspaper for the president, and now the president-elect. It is significantly different than the information provided in briefings for candidates; those briefings act as primers to help bring candidates up to speed on topics like China, Iran and the Islamic State.  Candidates have been free to request additional briefs on topics of personal interest, and those supplemental briefings were made available to the other candidate.  The PDB is a focused intelligence product, and has a very high threshold for intelligence to be included.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Fox News has also learned that, because the briefing itself must be done in a secure facility, the White House has a dedicated transition space nearby that can be used by the president-elect to receive the PDB.  If Trump were to receive the brief in New York City, the president-elect would need to travel to a secure federal facility, such as the FBI office.  While Trump prepares to be read in on top U.S. intelligence, he and his transition team are busy assembling potential candidates for key roles in the Trump administration. He tweeted Friday that he had a “busy day” planned in New York and would soon “be making some very important decisions on the people who will be running our government.”  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.
Donald Trump ran his winning presidential campaign with the help of a tight-knit circle of close advisers. He won’t have that luxury once he takes control of the federal government.  Instead of an intimate cadre of family members and loyal aides, Trump will need to expand his circle – choosing over a dozen Cabinet secretaries, filling out a team of senior strategists to run his White House and making thousands of other lesser appointments.  The speculation over who will compose that team heated up the moment Trump was declared the victor in Tuesday’s election. Prospects for key posts have given maddeningly mixed messages, some expressing interest and others disavowing it.  Trump and his transition team, meanwhile, already are hard at work. Trump, after meeting with President Obama in Washington, tweeted Friday:  Busy day planned in New York. Will soon be making some very important decisions on the people who will be running our government! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 11, 2016  So how much different will the Trump administration really be?  Trump campaign aides are suggesting the Cabinet would “be a mix” of outsiders and more traditional choices.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  “Keep in mind, this campaign was an outsider campaign, so it would be foolish to go ahead place a bunch of Washington, D.C., insiders into D.C. roles,” a senior aide told reporters on VP-elect Mike Pence’s flight from New York to D.C. on Thursday.  The following is a cheat sheet of possible considerations so far for Trump’s Cabinet and White House positions:  Secretary of State  Former U.N. Ambassador John Bolton, former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Tennessee Sen. Bob Corker are at the center of speculation as to who would lead world affairs in a Trump administration.  Bolton, who served as U.N. ambassador under George W. Bush and is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, is reportedly one of the top candidates. Trump told radio host Hugh Hewitt back in August that Bolton would be under consideration, saying, "He was very good in defending me in some of my views, and very, very strong."  Gingrich, who was on the short-list for Trump’s VP spot, is almost certain to serve in the administration in some capacity. The question is where.  Speaking with the “Sean Hannity Show,” Gingrich voiced more interest in a non-Cabinet role.  "I would like to be sort of a senior planner, trying to think through how we fundamentally, at the most basic levels, restructure the federal government," Gingrich said. Gingrich suggested a Cabinet post would preclude him from playing such a role, saying, "I don't think it's possible to do one of the major jobs -- you know, running one of the departments -- and think strategically."  Corker, who heads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, endorsed Trump over the summer and has expressed interest in the secretary of state post.  Foreign Relations Richard Haass is another name floating around for the lead diplomat position.  Secretary of Defense  Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions is one top official speculated to be in consideration for the lead spot at the Pentagon. Sessions, who was the first U.S. senator to endorse Trump in the primaries, serves on the Senate Committee on Armed Services and chairs the Strategic Forces subcommittee.  Retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, an important figure in giving Trump’s military strategy legitimacy throughout his campaign, is also being floated for the position. However, his nomination would require a congressional waiver as law stipulates retired military personnel must wait seven years before taking the defense secretary position.  Attorney General  Rudy Giuliani, the former New York City mayor, has expressed interest in the position and is being touted as a leading candidate for the job. Prior to his tenure as mayor, Giuliani was a U.S. associate attorney general and the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York under President Reagan.  Speaking Thursday on “Fox & Friends,” Giuliani left the door open.  “I thought I was finished, but then I got involved in the Trump campaign,” he said. “When you talk to the president of the United States and he wants you to do a job, I certainly would not go into that conversation with a firm 'no' in my mind. But I’d want to talk about maybe three or four other people that might be better for it. If there aren’t, then maybe I would do it.”  Giuliani said he would be interested in focusing on cybersecurity, and talked up another possible AG prospect, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.  While Christie has been hurt politically by the “Bridge-gate” scandal, Giuliani said that was blown out of proportion and Christie would be good for “any position.”  Secretary of the Treasury  Steven Mnuchin, Trump’s finance chairman and former Goldman Sachs banker, could be a top pick for Treasury secretary. Trump indicated late in the campaign that he would seriously consider Mnuchin for the position. Brokers and bankers on Wall Street reportedly looked to Mnuchin for insight on Trump’s finance policy.  Carl Icahn, chairman of Icahn Enterprises, also is speculated to be in the running.  JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon’s name has come up, too.  In a memo to staff obtained by FoxNews.com, Dimon said Trump’s election and other developments in the world signal widespread frustration with the “lack of economic opportunity.”  “We need to listen to those voices,” he said in the memo.  Chief of Staff  At least three big names have been bandied about most frequently for the coveted and powerful chief of staff role: RNC Chairman Reince Priebus, campaign CEO Steve Bannon and Christie.  Priebus, who presided over the GOP’s 2014 midterm takeover of the Senate and now the 2016 takeover of Washington, was tasked with building the virtually non-existent bridges between the national Republican Party and Trump’s campaign as he closed in on the nomination, as well as smoothing over disagreements over Trump’s bid among congressional Republicans. When asked about the speculation, Priebus told Fox News: “I don’t know. This is up to President-elect Trump. He will make all of these decisions. He will surround himself with great people.”  Bannon, the Breitbart News executive who came on as the Trump campaign CEO, also reportedly is in the running for the position.  Christie, who is leading Trump’s transition team, was the first GOP presidential candidate to endorse Trump and was on the final short-list for Trump’s VP spot, only to be passed over for Mike Pence.  Other Cabinet positions  Though lower-profile positions have not yet received as much attention, some names have been floated.  Dr. Ben Carson, the retired neurosurgeon and former presidential candidate, has been mentioned for Secretary of Education and is virtually the only name being floated for Secretary of Health and Human Services after Florida Gov. Rick Scott signaled he was not interested in the position. Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin has been mentioned in reports for Secretary of the Interior. Politico also reported that Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke, an outspoken Trump supporter whose law-and-order message dovetails with the president-elect’s, is a potential candidate for Homeland Security secretary. Retiring Rep. Jeff Miller of Florida, chairman of the Veterans Affairs committee, is possibly being considered for Secretary of Veterans Affairs.  FoxNews.com's Danny Jativa and Fox News' Dan Gallo contributed to this report.
Ahead of November’s election, FoxNews.com is giving you the chance to predict how the contest will play out across the states and what the final result will be come Nov. 8.  To test your prediction skills, go to the map.  Start by selecting an electoral map as a template. Choose from the 2008 map, the 2012 map, Fox News’ battleground map as it stands now, or strategist Joe Trippi’s prediction. Or start from scratch. Then, make your predictions for each state. Pick a color -- red (Republican), blue (Democrat) or gray (battleground). As you select each state with the paintbrush cursor, you will see how your choice compares with how that state leans in other maps.  Then share your map via email, Twitter or Facebook, or copy the link to your clipboard to share with your friends -- this will let you see how accurate you are when Nov. 8 rolls around.
With one day before Election Day, Hillary Clinton has a four percentage-point lead over Donald Trump, according to the final Fox News national pre-election poll of likely voters.  She’s ahead by 48-44 percent, while Gary Johnson receives 3 percent and Jill Stein 2 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  In the two-way race, it’s also Clinton over Trump by 48-44 percent.  Click here to read the poll results.  Clinton’s advantage is within the poll’s margin of error in both the two-way and four-way races.  The last Fox News Poll, released Friday, had Clinton ahead by two points in the four-way race and one point in the head-to-head matchup.  Clinton is now winning among women by 12 points (52-40 percent), blacks by 85 (89-4 percent), Hispanics by 33 (63-30 percent), and voters under 30 by 16 (51-35 percent).  That level of support is close to that of Barack Obama’s winning coalition against Mitt Romney in 2012, when he won among women by 11 points (55-44 percent), blacks by 87 (93-6 percent), Hispanics by 44 (71-27 percent), and young voters by 23 (60-37 percent).  Trump is favored among men by 5 points (48-43 percent), whites by 17 (54-37 percent), white evangelical Christians by 63 (78-15 percent), and whites without a college degree by 31 (61-30 percent).  That nearly matches Romney’s performance. He won men by 7 points (52-45 percent), whites by 20 (59-39 percent), white evangelicals by 57 (78-21 percent), and whites without a degree by 26 (62-36 percent).  Trump is ahead of Clinton among veterans by 56-38 percent. She leads with first-time voters, by 48-42 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Nine percent of Republicans support Clinton. That’s more than twice the number of Democrats backing Trump (four percent).  And while Clinton garners more support among Democrats (91 percent) than Trump does among Republicans (86 percent), she trails among independents. They go for Trump by 42-36 percent, and 14 percent back Johnson or Stein. Independents went for Romney by 50-45 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  “Republican partisans have mostly come home, but it looks to be too little, too late for Trump,” says Republican pollster Daron Shaw, who conducts the Fox News Poll along with Democratic counterpart Chris Anderson. “Unless his voters are really shy, it seems his upwards trend has stalled just short of the goal line.”  Clinton’s backers (61 percent) remain less likely than Trump’s (68 percent) to “strongly” support their candidate.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Trump continues to best Clinton narrowly on being seen as honest and trustworthy (+4 points). At the same time, she significantly outperforms him on having the right temperament to serve as president (+23) and being qualified for the job (+18) -- plus, she has an advantage on personal favorability (+4).  Related Image Expand / Contract  “The over 1-in-10 voters who don’t like either candidate tend to think Clinton has the temperament and qualifications to be president, but Trump doesn’t,” says Anderson. “And that looks to be the difference in the election.”  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,410 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from November 3-6, 2016. The survey includes results among 1,295 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus 2.5 percentage points for results among both registered voters and likely voters.
Hillary Clinton has a 2-point edge over Donald Trump with less than a week before the election.  That’s according to a new national Fox News Poll of likely voters conducted Tuesday-Thursday.  In the four way race, Clinton tops Trump by a 45-43 percent margin. She was up by three points a week ago (44-41 percent) and by six in mid-October (45-39 percent). Gary Johnson gets 5 percent and Jill Stein two percent. Only four percent are undecided.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Without third-party candidates in the mix, Clinton is ahead by just one point: 46-45 percent. She was up five points in the two-way last week (49-44 percent, October 22-25).  Click here for the full poll results  Her lead is within the poll’s margin of sampling error in both the two-way and four-way races.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Trump is favored by men (+11 points), whites (+19), and whites without a college degree (+33).  Clinton leads among women (+13 points), blacks (+74), and voters under age 30 (+17). She’s also ahead by 11 points among the one-in-five who have already voted (50-39 percent).  They split the support of whites with a college degree: Trump gets 45 percent to Clinton’s 42 percent. In 2012, GOP nominee Mitt Romney won this group by 14 points (56-42 percent).  Both candidates are consolidating their bases, but Clinton outperforms Trump: she gets 90 percent among Democrats and he gets 85 percent of Republicans.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Trump has an 8-point edge over Clinton among independents (41-33 percent). That’s down from his 13-point advantage last week (41-28 percent). Johnson takes 11 percent.  Trump has a six-point strength-of-support advantage, as more of his backers (71 percent) say they “strongly” support their candidate than Clinton supporters (65 percent). In addition, his folks (63 percent) are more likely than hers (54 percent) to be “extremely” interested in the race.  That enthusiasm gap may be one consequence of the renewed FBI investigation into Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was secretary of state. How much damage has the scandal really done to her campaign?  Some 74 percent of voters say the FBI investigation won’t make a difference to their vote, and four percent actually say it makes them more likely to support her. Yet 21 percent say it makes them less likely to vote for her, including 37 percent of Republicans and 21 percent of independents. Among Democrats, 5 percent say it makes them less likely to support Clinton, while 7 percent say it makes them more likely.  “The FBI action forced Clinton to play defense in the closing week,” says Democratic pollster Chris Anderson. “But the number of voters who will move out of her column to someone else will likely be minimal. If the election really comes down to the wire, perhaps it makes a difference in a battleground.” Anderson conducts the Fox News Poll with Republican counterpart Daron Shaw.  Then again, the 59 percent who are bothered by Clinton’s use of a private email server is actually down a touch from 60 percent who felt that way at the end of September. For 39 percent it’s “no big deal.” The emails bother almost all Republicans (92 percent), most independents (69 percent), but just one in five Democrats (22 percent).  While over half of voters, 51 percent, doubt the FBI will find anything that will lead to criminal charges against Clinton, some 47 percent think it will -- including 42 percent of independents and 16 percent of Democrats.  Related Image Expand / Contract  So it’s not surprising that by a 16-point margin, more voters are concerned scandals would have a “serious effect” on a Clinton administration (70 percent) than a Trump administration (54 percent). Moreover, nearly half (46 percent) are “very” worried about scandals if Clinton were elected, up from 37 percent three weeks ago.  Then there’s Clinton’s honesty rating. It ticked up one point to 31 percent. It was a record-low 30 percent among likely voters last week. For Trump, 38 percent say he’s honest and trustworthy. Honesty is one of the only personal traits where he bests her.  Related Image Expand / Contract  “Much of the recent commentary misses the big picture here,” says Shaw. “The specific charges matter less than the fact that they reinforce the broad sense that Clinton’s dishonest. If late-breaking voters decide to make a leap of faith with Trump, it will be because of this feeling.”  Fifty-eight percent say Clinton has the temperament to serve effectively as president, compared to just 40 percent for Trump.  While both candidates remain unpopular, Clinton’s lost her advantage here. Her net negative rating is 13 points (43 favorable vs. 56 unfavorable). Last week she was underwater by 8. At the same time, Trump’s net negative 12 points (43 favorable vs. 55 unfavorable) improved a bit from negative 14 a week ago.  Roughly 15 percent of likely voters dislike both Clinton and Trump. Who are they backing? Clinton and Johnson garner 25 percent each from this group, and 23 percent go for Trump.  The number who think Clinton will win the election is down, yet a majority still thinks she’ll be the next president: 56 percent, down from a high of 66 percent three weeks ago (October 10-12). Still, only 35 percent expect a Trump victory.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Most of her supporters remain confident in their candidate, as 90 percent think it will be Madame President, down slightly from 93 percent in mid-October. At the same time, Trump’s supporters are feeling more confident: 69 percent think he’ll win, up from 56 percent.  Meanwhile, 80 percent of Clinton supporters say they’ll accept the election outcome if Trump wins. That’s down from 88 percent last week. That number holds steady among Trump supporters, as 58 percent say they’ll accept the outcome if Clinton wins.  Nearly three-out-of-four will go to the voting booth unhappy with Uncle Sam: 46 percent are “dissatisfied” with the way the federal government is working and another 27 percent are “angry.” Trump backers are four times as likely as those supporting Clinton to say they’re angry (44 vs. 11 percent).  Clinton’s lost ground on the issues. For example, the new poll finds likely voters trust her over Trump on making decisions about using nuclear weapons by 16 points. That’s down from a 25-point lead in mid-October.  The two candidates tie on nominating the next Supreme Court justice and handling terrorism. Clinton has consistently been preferred on the court, and in five of the six previous polls she had the edge on terrorism.  Related Image Expand / Contract  And Trump’s current 8-point advantage over Clinton on handling the economy is his largest yet.  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,211 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from November 1-3, 2016. The survey includes results among 1,107 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus 2.5 percentage points for results among registered voters and plus or minus 3 points among likely voters.
Hillary Clinton remains ahead of Donald Trump with just three weeks until Election Day.  She has a six-point lead over Trump, 45-39 percent, in a new Fox News Poll of likely voters. Clinton was up by seven points last week (45-38 percent) and by two in early October (44-42 percent). Gary Johnson stands at 5 percent and Green Party’s Jill Stein at 3 percent.  In the head-to-head matchup, Clinton’s up by 49-42 percent. It was 49-41 percent at the end of last week (Oct. 10-12).  Related Image Expand / Contract  Clinton’s advantage over Trump is at the edge of the poll’s margin of error in the four-way contest and outside the margin of error in the head-to-head ballot.  The national poll, released Tuesday, was conducted Saturday through Monday. The third and final presidential debate will be moderated by Fox News Channel’s Chris Wallace in Las Vegas Wednesday.  CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  A large gender gap marks the four-way race, as Trump is ahead by 7 points among men, while Clinton is up 17 points among women. She also leads among non-whites (+51 points) and younger voters under 30 (+19). Johnson and Stein get the support of one in five of these young voters.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Whites with a college degree favor Clinton (+9 points), while whites without a degree go for Trump (+27). He’s also the choice among whites (+10 points), veterans (+17), and those who regularly attend religious services (+16).  Trump has an edge among independents (+7), but is hurt by a lack of party loyalty. Only 80 percent of Republicans back him. Eighty-seven percent of Democrats support Clinton.  The two are about equally matched on strength of support and interest. About two-thirds of each candidate’s supporters back their choice “strongly,” and almost all of their supporters are extremely or very interested in the race.  There are, however, major differences on temperament and judgment. Overall, 61 percent of voters say Clinton has the temperament to serve effectively as president. Sixty-one percent think Trump doesn’t.  By a 7-point margin, voters say Clinton has the judgment to serve (53-46 percent). It’s the reverse for Trump, as by a 23-point margin they believe he lacks the judgment (37-60 percent).  That goes a long way toward explaining why Clinton is preferred over Trump by more voters when it comes to making decisions about using nuclear weapons (+25 points), handling an international crisis (+19), and handling foreign policy (+18).  While the two are more closely matched, Clinton also comes out on top on nominating Supreme Court justices (+6 points), as well as on handling the issues of Social Security/Medicare (+8), immigration (+6), and terrorism (+4 points).  However, Trump tops Clinton by six points on handling the economy -- and voters say that’s the most important issue facing the country. Clinton briefly had the edge last week (+3 points). Otherwise, Trump has consistently had a single-digit advantage on the economy.  Republican pollster Daron Shaw says if the election focus is on creating jobs and spurring economic growth, then “Trump is very competitive.” Shaw conducts the Fox News Poll with Democrat Chris Anderson.  Despite her close ties to the Obama administration, by a slim 47-44 percent margin, voters pick Clinton over Trump as the one who will “change the country for the better.”  More registered voters would feel “enthusiastic” or “pleased” if Clinton were to win in November (37 percent), than would feel that way about a Trump win (30 percent).  Both candidates receive more negative reactions to them winning (displeased/scared) than positive ones (enthusiastic/pleased). Over half would feel negatively if Trump were to become the next president (56 percent), including 46 percent who would feel “scared.” For Clinton, 48 percent would react negatively, including 31 percent “scared.”  Seventy-six percent of Democrats would feel scared about a Trump presidency. Far fewer Republicans, 56 percent, say a Clinton victory scares them.  Related Image Expand / Contract  It’s well-established that neither candidate is seen as honest by the electorate. Yet on specific scandals, the poll finds a difference: more voters think Clinton is lying about how her emails were handled while she was secretary of state (67 percent) than think Trump is lying about the allegations women are making against him (51 percent). Even so, the email issue matters less in vote choice, as 24 percent of those who think Clinton is lying still back her, while just 8 percent of those who believe Trump is lying support him.  While neither is beloved, Trump’s personal ratings are worse than Clinton’s. She has a net negative rating of 4 points (47 percent favorable vs. 51 percent unfavorable). Trump is under water by 19 points (40 percent favorable vs. 59 percent unfavorable).  Related Image Expand / Contract  Again, the party faithful aren’t all with Trump: 22 percent of Republicans have a negative opinion of him. That’s more than twice the number of Democrats who view Clinton unfavorably (9 percent).  Even so, 77 percent of Republicans view Trump favorably, which is much more positive than their view of some of his GOP primary opponents: Ted Cruz (59 percent), Jeb Bush (56 percent), and John Kasich (44 percent). Former NYC Mayor Rudy Giuliani, a Trump surrogate, is viewed favorably by 72 percent of Republicans.  Clinton (91 percent favorable) has higher favorable ratings among Democrats than some of her surrogates, like former President Bill Clinton (88 percent favorable) and former Vice President Al Gore (76 percent favorable).  The stand-out is First Lady Michelle Obama, who gets a 59 percent positive rating overall, and a 95 percent favorable among Democrats.  Pollpourri  Are the media being fair to the candidates? Many voters don’t think so.  Fifty-one percent say news coverage of Trump has been fair (46 percent) or biased in his favor (5 percent). Yet 43 percent say it’s been unfairly biased against him.  On the other hand, more than 8-in-10 think coverage of Clinton has either been fair (55 percent) or unfairly positive (27 percent). Only 11 percent feel it’s been anti-Clinton.  Seventy-eight percent of those backing Clinton think her coverage has been fair or in her favor. For Trump, that number is just 13 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,011 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from October 15-17, 2016. The survey includes results among 912 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
The rivalry between Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio flared Tuesday at the final Republican primary debate of the year, as all the leading GOP candidates battled to show their tough-on-terror credentials.  Donald Trump, as in past debates, sparred sharply with his rivals on stage over his controversial proposals, notably his call to ban Muslims from entering the country. But the changing dynamics in the race appeared to drive frequent clashes between the senators from Texas and Florida – who are now battling to be the Trump alternative in the race as Ben Carson slides in the polls.  With the terror attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif., refocusing the race squarely on security issues, Cruz from the outset tried to sound a tough message against radical Islam.  “We will utterly destroy ISIS,” Cruz vowed, later adding: “ISIS and radical Islamic terrorism will face no more determined foe than I will be.”  But he repeatedly was challenged by Rubio over his Senate positions – including for legislation reining in NSA metadata collection. Rubio accused Cruz of helping take away a “valuable tool” for security officials, while Cruz said: “Marco knows what he’s saying isn’t true.”  Rubio later cited a budget vote by Cruz to say: “You can’t carpet bomb ISIS if you don’t have planes and bombs to attack them with.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Rubio followed up on his attacks against Cruz Wednesday, calling out Cruz's "tough talk" on Fox and Friends.  "All this tough talk, Ted stood up there said 'I'm going to utterly destroy ISIS.' Anyone can say that, but what are you going to do it with?” Rubio said, accusing the Texas senator of supporting a budget that cuts defense spending and voting against defense authorization bills.  New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie used the arguing to contrast his own executive experience against the senators’ legislative history. He described their jobs as “endless debates about how many angels on the head of a pin from people who have never had to make a consequential decision.”  But Rubio and Cruz returned to the fray later on as they tried to cast each other as soft on illegal immigration. “I led the fight against [Rubio’s] legalization-amnesty bill,” Cruz charged.  Some analysts had expected the tensions Tuesday to flare between Trump and Cruz, as the Texas senator surpasses Trump in Iowa polls and is surging nationally. But Cruz avoided taking on Trump in favor of Rubio – he even jokingly backed Trump’s plan to build a border wall.  “We will build a wall that works, and I’ll get Donald Trump to pay for it,” Cruz said.  Later on, Trump backed off comments where he said Cruz acted in Congress like “a bit of a maniac.” Trump said Tuesday, “He’s just fine, don’t worry about it.”  Instead, Trump took heat mostly from former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who slammed Trump’s plan to ban Muslims from entering the United States as “not a serious proposal.”  “He’s a chaos candidate, and he’d be a chaos president,” Bush said.  Trump fired back that “Jeb doesn’t really believe I’m unhinged” and only went after him because he’s “failed in this campaign.”  The Trump-Bush acrimony simmered throughout the debate, with Bush later telling Trump he can’t “insult your way to the presidency,” and Trump once again reminding Bush that his poll numbers have plummeted while Trump is leading.  Whether Bush’s attacks will help the struggling candidate remains to be seen. Perhaps more consequential is whether Rubio or Cruz can present himself as more capable of taking on the country’s security challenges.  Bush followed up on his criticism of Trump on Fox & Friends Wednesday morning, saying: "I just don't think he's ready from day one to be President of the United States."  “He has made it clear that he gets his foreign policy advice from the shows, he makes it clear hew thinks Hillary Clinton was a great negotiator with Iran, he thinks ISIS wasn’t a threat just two months ago – he’s not a serious candidate,” Bush said.  All the leading candidates, though, focused on the terror threat throughout the CNN-hosted primary debate Tuesday night in Las Vegas – an event held just hours after Los Angeles closed its school system over a terror threat.  Citing that closure, which is now thought to have been prompted by a hoax threat, Christie said children will be going back to school filled with anxiety. And he said the country’s overall security environment has been hurt by President Obama and Hillary Clinton’s policies.  “America has been betrayed,” he said.  Christie cited his experience as a federal prosecutor, and governor, in saying that under a Christie presidency, “America will be safe.”  Carson also dismissed “PC” concerns about some of his own plans for taking on the terror threat.  “We are at war … We need to be on a war footing,” Carson said, while later making an argument against toppling foreign dictators. He compared the situation to being on a plane, where passengers in an emergency are advised to use oxygen masks themselves before helping others.  “We need oxygen right now,” Carson said, adding the government needs to think of the needs of the American people before solving everyone else’s problems.  Trump also sparred at times with other lower-polling candidates.  As before, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul questioned Trump’s policy proposals, including to restrict the Internet to clamp down on ISIS’ social media use. “Do you believe in the Constitution?” Paul said of Trump supporters. Trump clarified he’s only talking about restricting the Internet in parts of Iraq and Syria.  And when Trump suggested that the money spent toppling Mideast dictators could have been better spent on building America’s roads and bridges, former HP CEO Carly Fiorina compared him to Obama.  “That’s exactly what President Obama has said. I’m amazed to hear that from a Republican presidential candidate,” she said.  Ohio Gov. John Kasich also took issue with suggestions from Cruz and Trump that the priority in Syria is not to remove Bashar Assad.  “We can’t back off of this,” Kasich said. “He must go.”  CNN also hosted a debate Tuesday for the second-tier GOP candidates -- former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham and former New York Gov. George Pataki. Graham was particularly critical of Trump’s Muslim ban plan at that debate, accusing him of declaring war on Islam and delivering a “coup” for ISIS.
Hillary Clinton sharpened her attacks on insurgent rival Bernie Sanders Sunday night at the final Democratic presidential debate before the Iowa caucuses, accusing him of trying to “tear up” ObamaCare and siding with the gun lobby – as Sanders denied the claims and said he’s the candidate with the “momentum” in the race.  Reflecting a tougher tone on the campaign trail in recent days, the debate in Charleston, S.C., saw Clinton aggressively challenging the Vermont senator’s record in a bid to arrest his rise in the polls. In a throwback to the 2008 race, the former first lady, New York senator and secretary of state also stressed her experience and readiness for the job, while Sanders repeatedly called for “political revolution.”  Highlighting that divide, Clinton slammed Sanders for his universal health plan to offer “Medicare for all,” the details of which were released just hours before the debate. Clinton said she wants to improve on ObamaCare, but accused Sanders of moving to unravel the Obama administration’s signature domestic policy.  “I do not want to see the Republicans repeal it, and I don’t want to see us start over again with a contentious debate,” Clinton said. “To tear it up and start over again … I think is the wrong direction.”  Sanders fired back, calling some of Clinton’s criticism “nonsense.”  He said he wants to move to “Medicare for all” in order to provide health care “as a right” and extend insurance to the millions who still don’t have it. His plan calls for an array of tax hikes to pay for it.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  As for the existing law, Sanders said, “We’re not going to tear up the Affordable Care Act -- I helped write it.”  The two top-polling rivals, as well as former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley, took the stage for just their fourth debate of the season. The debate was hosted by NBC News.  Clinton is stepping up her attacks as she tries to ensure she starts off the 2016 election cycle better than she did in 2008, when she lost Iowa to then-Sen. Barack Obama. But Sanders jabbed at Clinton early on by reminding her Sunday that he’s tightened the race in the first two contests.  “In Iowa, New Hampshire, the race is very, very close,” he said, adding, “We have the momentum.”  Clinton and Sanders also clashed over gun control, with Clinton accusing Sanders of siding with the gun lobby and only recently reversing his stance on a key piece of gun legislation.  “He has voted with the NRA, with the gun lobby numerous times,” Clinton said.  Sanders over the weekend changed his position and backed legislation to reverse a law he once supported that would give gun manufacturers legal immunity. Clinton said she was pleased Sanders had “reversed his position on immunity,” but said the industry has been given a “total pass” so far.  Sanders, though, accused Clinton of being “very disingenuous” on guns. The Vermont senator said he “stood up to the gun lobby” on several fronts.  Clinton, meanwhile, stressed her experience throughout the debate, reminding voters of her time advising Obama in the Situation Room and leading key foreign policy decisions – even defending controversial policies like the “reset” with Russia.  “We need a president who can do all aspects of the job,” Clinton said. “I’m prepared and ready to take it on.”  Sanders, though, called for a “political revolution” that would “transform this country,” urging an overhaul of the campaign finance system he claims has undermined American democracy.  Another pre-debate twist was a spat over Sanders’ medical fitness to be president.  After a recent report claimed a Clinton ally was preparing to seek the 74-year-old Vermont senator’s medical records, the Sanders campaign called the move a “personal” and unfounded attack. The Clinton camp quickly distanced itself from the reported plan – though Sanders on Sunday declared he would release his medical records anyway. The issue did not come up onstage.  Sanders had one seemingly awkward moment at Sunday’s debate, when he didn’t properly hear a YouTube question on police shootings and asked a moderator to repeat it. He then drew applause from the audience by calling for a Justice Department investigation whenever someone is killed in police custody.  The candidates clashed again over Wall Street ties, with O’Malley accusing Clinton of having a “cozy relationship” with Wall Street, while Sanders criticized her for getting hundreds of thousands of dollars in speaking fees from Goldman Sachs.  Clinton responded that O’Malley raised money from Wall Street as head of the Democratic Governors Association. O’Malley countered by saying that he was not using that money for his current campaign.  O’Malley only is polling at about 2 percent nationally and once again was sidelined throughout much of Sunday night’s debate. He frequently protested and tried to interject.  Sanders, though, has emerged as an insurgent candidate with grassroots support, challenging Clinton’s once-presumed lock on the nomination – a situation all too familiar for the candidate who ran in 2008 under similar conditions.  Sanders arguably faces more questions about his electability in a general election than did Obama in 2008 -- and tried to ease those concerns by claiming Sunday that various branches of the Democratic Party would eventually support him. While Clinton maintains her lead both nationally and in vital early-voting Southern states, Sanders has been closing the gap in Iowa and currently leads in most polls in New Hampshire – which votes Feb. 9.  The Iowa caucuses are Feb. 1.  Foreign policy also took center stage Sunday, one day after the Obama administration secured the release of four Americans held in Iran in exchange for seven Iranians. A fifth American also was freed, though officials said that was unrelated to the swap – which coincided with the implementation of key terms of the Iran nuclear deal.  Sanders said Sunday that the U.S. should eventually move to “normalize relations with Iran,” while Clinton seemed to urge more caution.  “We’ve had one good day over 36 years. And I think we need more good days” before moving to normalize relations, she said.
Before he gets to any of his campaign promises – building a border wall with Mexico, killing ObamaCare, reversing President Obama’s executive orders – Donald Trump will first face the daunting debt ceiling.  On Capitol Hill over the past few years, we’ve been through a government shutdown. Threats and precipices of government shutdowns. The payroll tax debacle. A partial shutdown of the FAA. The fiscal cliff. There have even been minor iterations of the so-called “dairy cliff” and the more obscure “whisky cliff.”  But all of these crises are pedestrian compared to the behemoth dilemma of them all: the debt ceiling.  Republicans in Congress and Obama waged an epic battle in the summer of 2011 over hiking the debt limit. That’s the statuary threshold dictating how much money the government can borrow at any one time. The debt ceiling is currently $20.1 trillion. Congress voted last fall to “suspend” the debt ceiling until March of 2017.  Votes to raise the debt ceiling are the most-onerous ones a member of Congress can cast. No one wants to vote to “raise” the debt ceiling because it looks fiscally irresponsible. Yet failing to vote to raise the debt ceiling could send a shock through the bond market and roil global financial markets. Such a phenomenon unfolded in August, 2011 even though Congress managed to hike the debt ceiling.  So, the new Congress and President-elect Trump get to wrestle with this conflagration right out of the bat. House Speaker Paul Ryan doesn’t like raising the debt ceiling. Nor do most Republicans. So either they hit the debt ceiling or a handful of GOPers and lots of Democrats vote to raise the threshold. And then it’s up to Trump to sign the bill.  That would infuriate his supporters. But there is a potential out here.  Lawmakers and Trump could simply punt by “suspending” the debt ceiling.  Or, such a scenario introduces opportunity to actually address spending and rework the tax code. Ryan will like that if they can get it. President Obama and then-House Speaker John Boehner came very close to engineering a “Grand Bargain” to cut spending in the summer of 2011…before then it fell apart.  Either way, the debt ceiling debacle will likely serve as Trump’s first big battle and also could present a big opportunity for Trump and Republicans in Congress to address major fiscal issues.  Another top priority is the prospective repeal of ObamaCare.  The House voted umpteen times over the past few years to repeal it but because of a Senate Democratic majority, the GOP could never force a Senate vote. And, President Obama would not sign such a bill to repeal.  But that changed when Republicans won the Senate in 2014.  Senate rules allow for a once-year-option called “Budget Reconciliation.”  The budget reconciliation process blocks filibusters and sidesteps the necessary 60 vote threshold which senators can use to block many things. Instead, the Senate needs a simple majority to advance bills.  Trump has signaled he would sign a repeal bill. Democrats would certainly try to filibuster a conventional ObamaCare repeal bill under standard Senate rules but not under budget reconciliation.  But here’s the rub for repealing ObamaCare: there must be a replacement bill ready to go with the votes to pass. Congressional Republicans have never advanced a replacement bill because they never had one which could pass. If they repeal ObamaCare with no replacement ready to go, chaos ensues.  Another priority is the Supreme Court.  It is entirely possible that Senate Democrats, who are still in the minority, could filibuster any Trump nominee for the high court. That sets a precedent. Keep in mind that Senate Republicans have not filibustered the nomination of Merrick Garland for the Supreme Court. They simply have not considered his nomination.  The Senate has never filibustered a Supreme Court nomination which made it to the floor. However, the Senate did filibuster President Lyndon Johnson’s nomination to elevate Supreme Court Justice Abe Fortas to become Chief Justice of the United States. Fortas never made it over the 60 vote cloture bar to end debate. But Fortas remained on the Court..as he was already a Justice.  If Democrats do block a Trump SCOTUS nominee, Republicans may also feel that what's good for the goose is good for the gander.  In November, 2013, Senate Democrats took the extraordinary step of unilaterally lowering the "cloture" bar for filibusters of most executive branch nominees from 60 to a simple majority. However, they kept the 60 vote threshold to finish debate on Supreme Court nominees. Confirmation would still entail a simple majority.  Republicans could very well engineer their own version of the so-called "nuclear option" and lower the bar to wrap up debate on Supreme Court nominees from 60 to just 51.
The race for Senate control is expected to be close. It may just hinge on a seat or two either way.  Here is a primer on phenomena to track as the Senate returns roll in.  Republicans hold a 54-46 seat edge in the Senate now. Two independents, Sens. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., and Angus King, I-Maine, caucus with the Democrats.  Approximately a third of the Senate is up for reelection every two years. 2010 was a big year for Senate Republicans – even though they fell short of control. As a result, Republicans are defending 24 of the 34 seats in play this cycle. 2010 was not only a “Republican” year in Senate contests but a midterm year. Those two factors work directly against the GOP this year as freshman, Republican senators who won in 2010 now find themselves on the ballot in battleground states in a presidential election year.  Consider the competitive races facing Sens. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., Pat Toomey, R-Pa., and Ron Johnson, R-Wis. All are in states that are barnburners at the presidential level. This factor alone is one of the reasons the GOP majority is at risk. The electorate is a lot different in the presidential atmosphere of 2016 compared with the Tea Party-infused playing field of the 2010 midterm.  The other issue is that Republicans only have one seat they may be able to seize from Democrats. That seat’s in Nevada as Rep. Joe Heck, R-Nev., runs against Democrat Catherine Cortez Masto. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., is quitting. Otherwise, Republicans play defense across the board.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  At first blush, many expected freshman Sens. Rob Portman, R-Ohio, and Marco Rubio, R-Fla., to struggle as they campaigned in swing states. But Portman appears to be up in the Buckeye State against former Democratic Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland. Rubio has a slightly more competitive contest against Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Fla. But polls show Rubio leading.  After finishing his presidential bid, Rubio planned to retire from the Senate after a solitary term. But GOP leaders coaxed Rubio to run again and the senator reversed course. With the Senate so close, the draft Rubio maneuver alone could be enough for GOPers to hold the Senate. One could also make the argument that Portman’s strong performance against the apparently ineffective Strickland effort could serve as a GOP firewall against a possible Democratic takeover.  By the same token, Rep. Todd Young, R-Ind., was expected to coast to victory to succeed retiring Sen. Dan Coats, R-Ind. That was until Democrats mustered a recruitment coup of their own by persuading former Sen. Evan Bayh, D-Ind., to run. Bayh replaced former Rep. Baron Hill, D-Ind., as the prospective Democratic nominee. Bayh is as good a nominee as the Democrats can get to run against Young. But that doesn’t mean it’s been easy. Bayh’s faced criticism about why he left the Senate in the first place and just how much time he spends in the Hoosier State.  Presidential turnout will certainly influence Senate races in New Hampshire, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and North Carolina. Democrats had been fretting about how a Philadelphia transit strike could disproportionately impact urban, Democratic voters, but the strike has ended just in time. Pennsylvania is a must-win state for both presidential campaigns. Philadelphia is a Democratic stronghold. Diminished turnout in Philadelphia could boost Toomey in his race against challenger Democrat Katie McGinty.  In the Badger State, Johnson has earned traction in recent days in a rematch against the man he defeated in 2010, former Sen. Russ Feingold, D-Wis. House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., barnstormed the state with Johnson to campaign. Johnson’s seen his numbers climb in the past few weeks.  Some Republicans criticized Sen. Richard Burr, R-N.C., for purportedly starting his race late against Democrat Deborah Ross. Watch to see how the Tar Heel state votes for president. Since the direct election of senators began more than 100 years ago, North Carolina voters almost always align their votes for Senate and President.  The ticket-splitting exception came in 1968 when North Carolina voted for President Richard Nixon and reelected Sen. Sam Ervin, D-N.C. Ironically, it was Ervin who would go on to chair the panel which probed Nixon and Watergate.  Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo., is locked in a tight contest against Democrat Jason Kander. Missouri is a Republican state. But people would have given you a quizzical look a year ago if you predicted Blunt would be in worse shape at this stage of the cycle than Rob Portman.  Kander is a moderate Democrat. Some voters view Blunt as being too much of a “D.C. insider.” Moreover, there’s precedent for Blunt losing contests he should win. In 2006, Blunt served as the House majority whip and was poised to succeed former House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, who faced legal trouble. Former House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, then defeated Blunt for DeLay’s post in an upset. Blunt later gave up the whip post and ran for the Senate in 2010.  There are at least two Senate seats where we may not get the result Tuesday night: Louisiana and Georgia. Both require runoffs if no candidate secures 50.1 percent. The Louisiana runoff is scheduled for Dec. 10. The Georgia runoff comes Jan. 10. The latter could pose a problem as the 115th Congress starts Jan. 3. Thus, it’s entirely possible the Senate could start with one party in charge, and either move to a tie or flip depending on Georgia’s January outcome.  There is one non-election night issue that also demands attention. With Harry Reid retiring, Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., is poised to step in to succeed the Nevada Democrat as Democratic leader. The only question is whether Schumer will be the majority leader or minority leader. Schumer long ago wrapped up the votes to take over for Reid when the Nevada Democrat announced he was stepping aside early last year.  Secondly, there could be a leadership contest between Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin, D-Ill., and Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., for the number two job. Murray currently holds a lower-tier Senate Democratic leadership post.  Senate Democrats plan to hold their leadership elections on Nov. 16.
“Everybody is wrong about everything, just about all the time” -- Chuck Klosterman, “Sex, Drugs and Cocoa Puffs: A Low Culture Manifesto”  There’s not a lot we can predict going into election night -- at the presidential level, in given states, the Electoral College vote count, House contests, Senate races or control of either body.  It is pedestrian to project that Republicans will likely hold control of the House and the Senate is likely to flip to Democratic control -- but it will be close.  We just don’t know. So we won’t try to guess. But when it comes to the House, we can provide some markers to decipher the evening’s nomenclature.  In New Hampshire, Rep. Frank Guinta, a Republican, is in a rematch with former Democratic Rep. Carol Shea-Porter.  The contest is like Alien vs. Predator. Each candidate keeps coming back, refusing to die. It’s a classic district in a swing state influenced by turnout in presidential years versus midterm years. This is the fourth consecutive election in which Guinta and Shea-Porter faced off.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Shea-Porter claimed the seat from former GOP Rep. Jeb Bradley in 2006. Voters re-elected Shea-Porter in 2008. But then things got interesting.  Guinta first defeated Shea-Porter in 2010. But she rallied to win in 2012. Guinta returned the favor in 2014. Shea-Porter appears to have the advantage in presidential years and Guinta in midterms. The Federal Election Commission ruled Guinta’s parents improperly donated $335,000 to his 2010 campaign.  Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., called on Guinta to resign. National Republicans not-so-secretly hoped Guinta would lose his primary so they would have a better shot of defeating Shea-Porter this year.  A win by either candidate could help portend in which direction the state and its four electoral votes go the presidential race.  Florida is another interesting battleground with several races in play. A rematch between GOP Rep. Carlos Curbelo and former Democratic Rep. Joe Garcia is also on the docket in Florida’s 26th Congressional district.  This is a quintessential battleground district in a swing state. A heavy Latino presence permeates the district, which stretches from the Miami suburbs through the Florida Keys. Garcia flipped the seat to Democratic control in 2012. But Curbelo beat Garcia in 2014.  Curbelo is a moderate Republican and worked to distance himself from Trump. Curbelo was perhaps the most-endangered Republican House member going into this cycle.  Garcia faced a firestorm when he declared that Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton was “under no illusions that you want to have sex with her or that she’s going to seduce you.” Democrats are showing strength in other Florida House races. But this will be the real test of their strength in the state.  Democrats will be on their way to a good night if Democrat Stephanie Murphy topples longtime Rep. John Mica, R-Fla. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) identifies the district as “the most competitive” in Florida.  The district was virtually split for President Obama and Mitt Romney in 2012. Florida GOP Gov. Rick Scott barely carried the district in his 2014 campaign against Democrat Charlie Crist. The best thing Democrats have going for them is that the redrawn district now favors their side.  Florida is an interesting place when it comes to House contests.  Democrats will probably lose at least one seat there. Rep. Gwen Graham, a conservative Democrat, decided to retire rather than face an uphill climb in a reworked district that is good for Republicans.  In fact, Fox News rates the Graham district as the most likely in the entire country to flip. Republican Neal Dunn is up against Democrat Walter Dartland.  Crist is running as a Democrat against Rep. David Jolly, R-Fla.  Fox rates that seat as the fourth-most likely seat to change parties this cycle.  In Maine, watch the performance of Republican Rep. Bruce Poliquin in a retread race from 2014 against Democrat Emily Cain.  Poliquin took the district from Democrats in 2014 when he defeated Cain. But Poliquin failed to crack 50 percent in a three-candidate race.  He is one of the most-endangered Republican candidates in the country.  Poliquin has declined to comment or endorse Donald Trump. This district is largely rural and stretches to the Canadian border. Democrats hold few rural districts, and it would be significant if Cain wins. Maine is one of two states that allocates its electoral votes proportionately. This could be one district that votes for Trump, even if the rest of Maine does not.  In Virginia, a contest between Rep. Barbara Comstock, a Republican, and Democrat LuAnn Bennett is a prime example of how Democrats now earn traction in exurban districts near major metropolitan areas.  Comstock’s northern Virginia district includes some rural areas. But its population is centered on the outer Washington, D.C. suburbs.  Comstock is a former Republican National Committee official and worked on the staff of her predecessor, former Rep. Frank Wolf, R-Va.  Trump’s lack of popularity in suburban Washington could wound Comstock. She has gone out of her way to distance herself from Trump. Democrats hoped to knock off Wolf for years but never turned the corner.  Bennett is the ex-wife of former Rep. Jim Moran, D-Va., who represented another suburban district in northern Virginia.  These are all races in the east that are among some of the most competitive. But keep an eye on the results in Virginia’s 5th Congressional district, vacated by retiring GOP Rep. Robert Hurt, and Pennsylvania’s 16th district, home to retiring GOP Rep. Joseph Pitts.  Both are off-the-radar seats in swing states. If Democrats are to have a shot at significant gains nationwide, surprise wins in either of those districts could reveal a lot. Democrat Jane Ditmar faces Republican Tom Garrett in Virginia. Democrat Christina Hartman is up against Republican Lloyd Smucker in Pennsylvania.  In Nebraska, freshman Democratic Rep. Brad Ashford entered the  2016 cycle as perhaps the most-endangered House Democrat.  He’s one of only three sitting Democrats who are believed to be in danger of losing. House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., campaigned for GOP nominee Don Bacon two weeks ago in this Omaha-centered district.  Mitt Romney carried the district in 2012 by seven points. Ashford unseated GOP Rep. Lee Terry in 2014 as Terry was prone to gaffes.  Republicans think Ashford’s victory was a fluke thanks to Terry’s missteps.  Like Maine, Nebraska allocates its electoral votes proportionately. Obama secured one of Nebraska’s five electoral votes in this district in 2008 but failed to repeat that feat in 2012.  Much like Florida in the south, Minnesota is also a battleground for House contests in the north.  Rep. Rick Nolan, D-Minn., is in a rematch from 2014 against Republican Stewart Mills. Many thought Nolan was a goner in 2014. He returned to Capitol Hill in 2012 after a 32-year break from serving in Congress.  Nolan flipped the rural district in the Iron Range of Minnesota back to Democratic control after Republicans claimed it the upset of the 2010 cycle.  Democrats chided Nolan for his lackluster campaign fundraising efforts two years ago. Nolan edged out Mills by a point-and-a-half, but failed to crack 50 percent.  Democrats hope to win the seat of retiring Rep. John Kline, R-Minn.  Democrat Angie Craig faces Republican Jason Lewis. Minnesota Democrats are also attempting to topple GOP Rep. Erik Paulsen. Democrat Terri Bonoff is the challenger.  Several seats in California are in the mix.  This is notable because California is not Trump country, and high Democratic turnout could prove potent against Republicans.  In addition, two Democrats are on the ballot to succeed retiring Democratic Sen. Barbara Boxer: California Attorney General Kamala Harris faces Rep. Loretta Sanchez. That gives Republicans little reason to hustle to the polls in California.  There may be Republicans easier for California Democrats to defeat than GOP Rep. Darrell Issa.  But there is essential no Republican whom Democrats would relish unseating more than Issa. He led multiple inquiries into the Obama administration and openly sparred with Democrats when chairman of the House Oversight committee.  Ironically, Issa’s tried to associate himself positively with Obama in campaign literature. Doug Applegate is the Democratic challenger.  The Republican turnout issue could pose issues for GOP Reps. Steve Knight, Jeff Denham and David Valadao.  Rep. Ami Bera is also one of the vulnerable California Democratic “triplets,” as he faces Republican Scott Jones. Bera’s 83-year-old father just went to prison for illegally donating campaign cash to his son. The congressman was never implicated.  In Kansas, the district held by GOP Rep. Kevin Yoder wasn’t expected to be competitive this cycle. But Democrat Jay Sidie is giving the three-term congressman a run.  The district is in play because of Democratic inroads into exurban districts in which educated, professional Democrats now reside. Yoder stuck with supporting Trump and that’s hurt him.  The race in Pennsylvania’s 9th Congressional district is downright bizarre. The only thing for sure is that its voters will send a Republican to Washington after the election. On its face, it looks like Democrats have a shot to win, as GOP Rep. Bill Shuster faces “Democrat” Art Halvorson.  But here’s the rub: Halvorson is a conservative who unsuccessfully challenged the relatively moderate Shuster in the GOP primary.  Halvorson then managed to coax enough write-in signatures to worm his way onto the Democratic line on the ballot, though he’s a Republican. Halvorson says if elected, he’ll conference with the Republicans.  In Nevada, GOP Rep. Cresent Hardy was the upset winner of the 2014 cycle. Now Hardy finds himself on the board in a presidential year against Democrat Ruben Kihuen.  In the state’s Senate race, GOP Rep. Joe Heck campaigns against Democrat Catherine Cortez Masto to succeed retiring Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, a Democrat.  Democrats have tried to unseat Heck since he won in the Las Vegas suburbs in 2010. Obama narrowly carried the district in 2012, and Democrats hold a registration edge.  In the contest to fill Heck’s seat, Democrat Jacky Rosen is a political neophyte recruited personally by Reid. Rosen opposes Republican Danny Tarkanian, the son of legendary UNLV basketball coach Jerry Tarkanian. The younger Tarkanian was the starting point guard on his father’s team in the early 1980s.  One would think the name “Tarkanian” would be a lock on the ballot in Nevada. But Tarkanian’s never won an election despite running for state Senate, secretary of State, Senate and Congress.  Tarkanian lost the GOP Senate nomination to Tea Party-favorite Sharron Angle in 2010 in an attempt to unseat Reid.  Every election cycle features a “wild card” race or two.  For this year, sources tell Fox News that the contest between freshman Rep. Ryan Zinke, R-Montana, and Democrat Denise Juneau is one of those races.  The other pits Rep. Don Young, R-Alaska, against Democrat Steve Lindbeck. Fox is told both contests “are closer than they should be” for incumbent Republicans in GOP states.  So, no predictions here -- other than it’s a high hurdle for Democrats to get the House. The best thing to gauge is how significant the pickups could be for Democrats -- or if a GOP firewall holds. These races serve as signposts to watch for to understand how the night may unfold.
Marshal Josip Broz Tito led the former Yugoslavia for decades before dying in 1980. Balkan scholars argue Tito unified the ethnically diverse country. After his passing, his country held together for 11 years – before rupturing amid bloody civil wars in 1991.  Former House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, and current Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., don’t have a lot in common with Marshal Tito. But there is at least one relevant parallel. Not much unifies House Republicans these days. But for a while, Boehner, and lately, Ryan, served as a tenuous adhesive to cement unity.  Republicans were frantic last fall when Boehner abruptly retired. House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., was on track to succeed Boehner until his bid imploded barely before it started. House Republicans were on the verge of balkanization had Ryan not stepped into the void as speaker.  There’s a reason the Balkans are, well, called the Balkans.  It sometimes takes a charismatic figure to ally diverse factions. Boehner was that leader for a while among House GOPers. And last fall, Ryan was certainly the only person on whom House Republicans could agree.  Without Ryan, House Republicans are balkanized. Questions now percolate as to whether the Wisconsin Republican can command the votes to continue as speaker should the GOP retain control of the House, albeit with a diminished majority next year.  Republicans may have postponed a grisly, internecine, leadership brawl last fall when Ryan reluctantly took the job -- after initially declining. Without a figure like Ryan to claim the gavel, House Republicans may have devolved into chaos as they scrounged for a leader.  On Wednesday, key members of the House Freedom Caucus huddled in the Washington, D.C., apartment of Rep. Mark Meadows, R-N.C., to discuss tactics in upcoming, internal GOP leadership elections scheduled for November 15. Some Freedom Caucus members and conservatives want to depose Ryan. But no one can match the votes Ryan could muster in a contested race. So does the Freedom Caucus field a candidate?  “Please do,” muttered one Ryan loyalist. “Then they’ll be exposed for how little support they have.”  It all comes down to mathematics: 236 House Republicans voted on the House floor to propel Ryan to the speaker’s suite last October. Nine GOPers defected from Ryan.  Not all Republicans admire the tactics Ryan used to approve an interim spending bill to avoid a government shutdown in late September. The House okayed the plan 342-85 – 170 GOPers voted yea. But 75 Republicans voted no. The government’s funded through early December. A December gambit by Ryan to avoid a shutdown which mirrors September’s effort could only further infuriate Republicans who oppose Ryan.  Don’t forget issues Ryan now has with some pro-Donald Trump lawmakers. If the GOP nominee loses, will Trump himself and other Trump allies excoriate Ryan? Could that make it tougher for some Republicans to support Ryan if their phones melt down with anti-Ryan, Trump-driven vitriol?  The general election falls next week followed by the internal GOP Conference election on November 15. House Republicans are expected to lose seats. A net loss of 12 Republicans is a good night for the GOP. A bad night is 20 or more losses. Either way, the House Republican Conference will likely be smaller next year. In the GOP Conference vote, a successful candidate for speaker only needs half of the membership plus one. But in January, the speaker must secure 218 votes on the floor, an absolute majority of the entire House.  Let’s say House Republicans lose 15 seats next week. House Republicans hold 246 seats with one vacancy. The vacant seat will likely return to Republican hands after the election. Thus, the “real” number of House Republicans is 247. A 15 seat GOP loss puts the conference at 232 Republican seats. Then, factor in defectors. If that number is nine like last fall, Ryan may only record 223 votes for speaker. That’s five more than needed to win. But it’s a thin margin.  Now consider the chances for Republicans to lose more than 15 seats – to say nothing of more than nine defections. If past is prologue, Ryan or any GOP candidate for speaker could be short of the 218 vote benchmark to win.  Would Ryan even attempt to stay on if he’s not guaranteed a win? Could a “no confidence” vote damage a future Ryan presidential bid? This explains why some Republicans discreetly laid groundwork for potential leadership campaigns should the dominoes fall.  Possible Ryan successors? Is Kevin McCarthy viable after his aborted speaker run last year? Could House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, R-La., gain traction? There would be chatter about Jason Chaffetz or Mike Conaway. Some invoked House Natural Resources Committee Chairman Rob Bishop, R-Utah, who served as speaker of the Utah House. House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady, R-Texas, commands applause from House Republicans for efforts to reform the tax code for the first time in 30 years.  It took a while for Yugoslavia to break up. Outside forces simply delayed the battle. The same could be true for House Republicans. A fratricidal altercation awaited the GOP in 2015 had Ryan not run for speaker. And if Ryan faces trouble, we may discover that the party only postponed that family melee.  Capitol Attitude is a weekly column written by members of the Fox News Capitol Hill team. Their articles take you inside the halls of Congress, and cover the spectrum of policy issues being introduced, debated and voted on there.
I have no idea if the U.S. Capitol is haunted.  It may be. But take your pick of most historic, cavernous, ornate, 200-year-old buildings and you’re bound to find a tale or two of the macabre. Craggy castles in Scotland. Opulent opera houses in Paris. Drafty churches in New England.  The U.S. Capitol is no different.  It’s the time of year when the press posts stories about phantasms that supposedly inhabit the Capitol.  And we’re not talking about former Rep. Anthony Weiner, D-N.Y., either.  There’s the apparition of the Demon Cat. The frightening feline usually shows up before a national tragedy.  People observed the demon cat before the assassinations of Presidents Lincoln and Kennedy. There’s the shadow of President and House member John Quincy Adams supposedly lurking around Statuary Hall as though trying to give a speech.  Soldiers are sometimes spied marching around the same room -- which doubled as a hospital during the Civil War. One may hear the sound of Sen. Boies Penrose, R-Pa., in a squeaky rocking chair echoing throughout the Senate wing of the Capitol as he culls through legislation -- despite having passed away in 1921.  You may even spot the late Rep. Preston Taulbee, D-Ky., lurking around a House stairwell, searching for a newspaper reporter who shot and killed him near that spot in 1890. Taulbee’s blood stains are supposedly visible on that marble staircase.  Usually, it’s politicians who want to shoot the reporters.  True or not, these tales from the Capitol crypt add to the allure of Congress at Halloween. As former colleague Todd Zwillich pointed out in a series of radio reports some years ago about congressional myths, the people who perpetuate the yarns are none other than the U.S. Capitol Police and lawmakers themselves.  Let’s look for a moment at non-ghost stories in the Capitol, many of which are embroidered with hyperbole.  There is a legion of stories about the time the British burned the Capitol. The British soldiers were supposedly such skilled horsemen that they even guided their steeds up a circular stairwell near the Speaker’s Office.  No one knows if that’s true. An inspection of the stairs makes it hard to believe. But, it’s a great story. People today refer to that turret stairway as “the British steps.”  An elegant chandelier hangs in the “mini” Rotunda near the office of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.  There are all sort of narratives about the history of the chandelier. People speculate it hung on a pirate ship or in a brothel. The reality is that it came from an opera house in Baltimore. But who wants to let the facts get in the way of a good story.  The same applies to the Capitol’s ghost stories.  After all, this is what we do in Washington. Spin. Embellish. Exaggerate. Anything to make the story more appealing. People on Capitol Hill are masters of these skills. It doesn’t matter whether they’re talking about a piece of legislation or a ghost story in the Capitol. And, like many other things in Washington, it’s hard to discern between what’s fact or fiction.  Could it possibly be any other way? Especially at Halloween?  You know that weird scratching sometimes heard inside the Capitol walls? Well, that’s the spirit of a stonemason who got sealed up in the foundation in the late 18th Century as they built the place.  That strange scent of soap that emanates from the old Senate baths? That’s likely Vice President Henry Wilson -- preparing some suds when stricken by a case of pneumonia before he died in his Capitol office.  Maybe your olfactory nerves don’t detect anything, but you hear whizzing and sniffling. Yep, that’s also Wilson, stricken with his croup.  This is the allure of attractions like this almost everywhere. People flock to haunted houses this time of year because they want to be surprised. Spooked. Have Leatherface jump out from behind some corner and chase you with a chainsaw. You don’t know specifically where or when this will happen. You just know that it will. And you will be scared.  Visits to the Capitol don’t quite work that way. OK, OK. Time for everyone to chortle and insert some line about the halls of Congress resembling a haunted house, too.  You know, all of the ghouls who work there and frighten the American people. But seriously, the Capitol is a living museum. It’s been there for a while. A lot of American history. And some grisly history, too. This merely enhances the allure of the Capitol.  It stands as this citadel of democracy -- and yet it’s home to bizarre lore which is somehow out of place.  At the end of the day, the Capitol is an old building. And old, historic structures accumulate supernatural mythology after a while.  One of the reasons people enjoy haunted houses is because it’s exhilarating to be scared in a “safe” situation. A well-done haunted house makes people feel like there is risk -- but there really isn’t.  The Capitol is an extremely, safe environment. It’s well-guarded. Lots of police. Professional, educated people with decades of expertise in policy areas work there. It’s an imposing, physically impressive structure. Most of what goes on inside the Capitol deals with the mundane mechanics of government and legislation.  So when visitors, aides and lawmakers hear about congressional ghost stories, they rationalize. How bad can it be really? It’s the seat of government. They debate and make law there. There may be ghosts.  But this isn’t some abandoned, dilapidated old house out in the countryside somewhere. The Capitol is a known quantity. So, the “threat” posed by any of the Capitol’s ghosts is limited.  By the same token, reports of hauntings at the Capitol defy nature.  Ghosts aren’t supposed to be there. But the Capitol can’t be that scary because it’s a known, bustling structure. The activity that unfolds inside is 180 degrees away from anything paranormal. The report of ghosts somehow doesn’t fit. That simultaneously contributes to the intrigue.  So it’s impossible to determine if the U.S. Capitol is haunted. Maybe it is. Maybe it isn’t. And even if it’s not, haunted, it makes for a good story.  And that always works in Washington.
“There is nothing new under the sun. But there are lots of old things we don't know.” – Ambrose Bierce  We’ve seen this all before. Everyone is apoplectic about how crazy the presidential campaign is. How crazy the congressional campaigns are. And then the dramatic FBI email news just days before the election.  Did you hear about Mike Pence’s plane sliding off the runway at LaGuardia? Can you believe it? What would have happened if…  Chill.  In an election year, October is always full of surprises.  This isn’t new. This zany stuff always unfolds in October just as the election cycle crescendos.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Let’s start with the Pence plane mishap…  Late-House Majority Leader Hale Boggs, D-La., and Rep. Nick Begich, D-Alaska, perished in a plane crash October 16, 1972. Nobody has ever found the plane after it lifted off from a socked-in Anchorage International Airport into turbulent skies. Boggs was in Alaska to help the freshman congressman campaign just before the election.  Also on October 16 -- but 28 years later in 2000 -- Missouri Democratic Gov. Mel Carnahan died in a Cessna that went down near St. Louis. Carnahan was running against then-Sen. John Ashcroft, R-Mo.  Missouri law prevented officials from striking Carnahan’s name from the ballot. Carnahan still defeated Ashcroft posthumously by 2 percentage points. Missouri’s new governor then appointed Carnahan’s wife, Jean, to the Senate where she served until losing to former Sen. Jim Talent, a Republican, in a 2002 special election.  Two years later, on October 25, 2002, Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn., barnstormed the state in his campaign against former Sen. Norm Coleman, a Republican. Wellstone died when the Beechcraft King Air A100 in which he was flying crashed in northern Minnesota. Then-Minnesota Gov. Jesse Ventura, an Independent, appointed Sen. Dean Barkley, also an Independent, to serve the rest of Wellstone’s term.  Democrats scrambling to find a replacement for Wellstone on the ballot tapped former Democratic Vice President and former Sen. Walter Mondale. Coleman defeated Mondale a few days later.  The term “October Surprise” entered the American political vernacular in 1964. That’s when Washington, D.C., police picked up a top aide to President Lyndon Johnson on “morals” charges after an incident in a YMCA locker room.  Aide Walter Jenkins had worked with Johnson in the House dating back to the late-1930s, followed him to the Senate, the Kennedy administration, then the White House.  Johnson thought his longtime aide was facing blackmail and that this could portend a “dirty trick” just before the election. The president got FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover on the phone immediately (remember the part about the FBI supposedly being above the fray just before elections we’ve been hearing so much over the past few days?) to order an investigation.  The president was just weeks away from facing Sen. Barry Goldwater, R-Arizona, at the polls.  Goldwater had long been talking about Texas cronyism and questions of ethics surrounding Lone Star State political operatives tied to Johnson. Goldwater’s campaign printed bumper stickers declaring “All the Way with LBJ, but Don’t Go Near the YMCA.”  In the New York Times, columnist James Reston wrote that the Jenkins bust “revived and dramatized all the harsh feelings about morals, and political cliques, and the Texas gang in Washington.”  Sound familiar?  “October Surprise” conspiracy theories only flourished after Jenkins’s arrest.  In October, 1968, rumors abounded that Johnson might craft a last-minute deal to halt the Vietnam War. Such an effort could vault Johnson’s Vice President and Democratic nominee Hubert Humphrey to the presidency over GOP nominee Richard Nixon.  It was thought that President Carter might engineer a special deal with Iran in October, 1980, to trigger the release of American hostages held in Tehran.  Of course, the converse theory was that the campaign of GOP nominee Ronald Reagan forged a pact for Tehran to hold the hostages through the election to make Carter appear weak.  Iran freed the hostages on Reagan’s inauguration day in 1981.  Four days before the 1992 presidential election, the feds indicted former Reagan Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger over the Iran-Contra affair.  This fueled speculation that then-President George. H.W. Bush knew something about the arms-for-hostages agreement. Republicans found the timing dubious. They charged this was an effort by Independent Counsel Lawrence Walsh to defeat Bush.  President Bill Clinton then vanquished Bush with Ross Perot placing third.  Bush pardoned Weinberger in the final days of his presidency.  We haven’t even talked about the election dispute in Florida in 2000 between President George W. Bush, a Republican, and Vice President Al Gore, a Republican. And that’s to say nothing of a 1976 DUI arrest of the younger Bush in Maine, which surfaced immediately before the 2000 election.  But almost no October Surprise resonated quite like the one in the closing days of the 2004 presidential campaign between George W. Bush and then-Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass.  A videotape -- recorded somewhere in the Hindu Kush mountains bordering Afghanistan and Pakistan -- surfaced on October 30, 2004.  The public hadn’t seen nor heard from Osama bin Laden for a while. But like an apparition appearing on Halloween, America’s mortal enemy infused immediately into that year’s presidential election. The tape rattled the country.  Would the phantasm of bin Laden remind voters that the 9-11 attacks unfolded on President Bush’s watch? Would it rekindle the fears of terrorism and perhaps work against Kerry?  Kerry’s surrogates wondered aloud why the U.S. had still not captured bin Laden.  Just months before, Kerry assumed the stage at the Democratic National Convention in Boston to accept his party’s presidential nod.  “I’m John Kerry and I’m reporting for duty,” declared the former Vietnam-era soldier, saluting the throng.  The bin Laden video almost echoed Kerry’s pronouncement, but with a vengeful sneer. It practically proclaimed “I’m Osama bin Laden and I’m reporting for duty.”  In the video, a robust-looking bin Laden stared directly into the camera and augured that neither Bush nor Kerry held the keys to U.S. security.  “I am speaking to tell you about the ideal way to avoid another Manhattan,” threatened bin Laden. “Your security is in your own hands.”  And so now we have another October Surprise, courtesy of FBI Director James Comey and “Carlos Danger,” the nom de plum of former Rep. Anthony Weiner, D-N.Y.  Comey cleared Hillary Clinton of wrongdoing tied to her email back in July. Republicans went nuts, accusing Comey of politics. Naturally, Democrats were grateful.  “Let me just say this about Director Comey,” beamed House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., in July. “This is a great man. We are very privileged in our country to have him be the director of the FBI.”  Sen. Dianne Feinstein, also a Californian and the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence panel, gushed with similar praise for the nation’s top G-Man.  “I’m especially grateful to the FBI and Director Comey -- who previously served as a U.S. attorney and deputy attorney general during the Bush administration -- for a thorough, objective review,” Feinstein said at the time.  But Friday’s news muted the Pelosi and Feinstein’s praise for Comey, as Republicans rallied to his cause.  “The public interest would be served by the FBI providing the facts, rather than allowing Republicans to stoke innuendo and falsehoods 11 days away from a presidential election,” Pelosi said.  Feinstein said she was “shocked” to read Comey’s missive Friday and called the move “appalling.”  “Director Comey’s announcement played right into the political campaign of Donald Trump, who is already using the letter for political purposes,” she said.  There are just a few hours left in October. Not a lot of time left for surprises. It’s just that these things happen all the time in October. And they sometimes trigger other events in November.  That’s when the real surprises happen.
If Republicans retain control of the House of Representatives, the party can thank House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis.; Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce, R-Calif.; Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton, R-Mich.; and Small Business Committee Chairman Steve Chabot, R-Ohio -- along with senior GOPers like Reps. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R-Fla., and Mario Diaz-Balart, R-Fla.  These lawmakers are expected to win re-election. That’s precisely the point. They didn’t face substantial opposition. Donald Trump is weighing down many congressional Republicans. This makes Democrats think they can get close to the 30 seats necessary to win the House. The lawmakers listed above represent districts that hold the potential to vote Democratic under the right circumstances.  Seats like these make or break a majority.  But Democrats don’t stand a shot at seizing any of these right now. In addition, freshman Reps. John Katko, R-N.Y.; Lee Zeldin, R-N.Y.; and Elise Stefanik, R-N.Y., are expected to hold their seats. The GOP nabbed those seats from Democrats two years ago.  Many GOPers are desperate to decouple themselves from the virulence of Trump. In 2006 and 2008, Democrats won the House by electing conservative Democrats in “rural” districts spanning Ohio, Indiana, Iowa, North Carolina, Mississippi and Alabama.  Virtually none of those “types” of districts are in the mix this round. Instead, Democrats swelled the map of potential seats in play in educated, “exurban” districts near big cities. Some of those competitive seats this cycle include Reps. Barbara Comstock, R-Va.; Kevin Yoder, R-Kan.; Darrell Issa, R-Calif.; John Mica, R-Fla.; and the retiring John Kline, R-Minn.  But potentially winning those seats doesn’t propel Democrats to the majority. Democrats must complement possible exurban wins with victories in the countryside. Democrats have a chance at securing the district now held by freshman Rep. Bruce Poliquin, R-Maine, who flipped the seat two years ago. But one of the most endangered Democratic incumbents is Rep. Rick Nolan, D-Minn., who holds a marginally Democratically-leaning district sprawling across Minnesota’s Iron Range.  Democrats are trying to build a “wave.” Political waves resemble ocean waves. They crash into the shore at the end. But Democrats can’t go Hawaii Five-O just yet.  A bad night for Democrats means they marshal a meager 11 or 12 seats. A really good evening has Democrats securing about 22 seats. The most likely scenario is a gain of 15 to 18 seats. All these are short of the 30 needed to take control.  Republicans believe their environment stabilized in recent days after Trump’s Access Hollywood tape hit the airwaves. It’s possible Democrats may have peaked too early.  One thing is certain: many of these races are nail biters.  “We could have a lot of 51-49 [percent] seats tilting either direction,” said one senior House GOP operative.  There are some bellwethers to discern how election night is going.  Watch the seats held by Mica and Freshman GOP Rep. Carlos Curbelo in Florida. A defeat of Mica is a big blow. A loss of both seats signals a big night for Democrats. Curbelo is locked in one of the most challenging reelection landscapes of 2016, having grabbed the seat from former Democratic Rep. Joe Garcia two years ago. The contest is far from over, but Republicans are optimistic Curbelo will maintain the seat in a Garcia replay.  Minnesota is also a testing ground. Democrats hope to hold Nolan’s seat, claim the seat of retiring GOPer John Kline and possibly dethrone Rep. Erik Paulsen, R-Minn. If Democrats execute that hat trick (appropriate for the Gopher State), they could be well on their way to at least 19 to 20 seats.  The presidential sweepstakes could weigh heavily in House contests. Let’s say it’s a solid night for Hillary Clinton and the networks call the presidential race early. That could impact voting out west. If the result is clear while western polls remain open, do Democrats cease voting because Clinton wins? Or, does a Clinton victory embolden GOP voters to ensure a check on the incoming administration?  Those scenarios resonate most in Colorado, Utah and California. In Colorado, watch GOP Reps. Mike Coffman and Scott Tipton. Tipton struggled some a few weeks ago but seems to have stabilized. If Tipton still faces trouble, Democrats are probably approaching a 25 seat gain.  Utah is a unique study due to Trump’s unpopularity and the nascent presidential candidacy of former House GOP aide Evan McMullin. Trump is unpopular in Utah and among Mormon voters. He waged various battles with Mitt Romney and Sen. Mike Lee, R-Utah. It’s not out of the question that McMullin could win Utah. Or McMullin could split the Republican vote and potentially propel Clinton to victory in the Beehive State. Freshman Rep. Mia Love, R-Utah, is in a rematch against 2014 Democrat Doug Owens. A senior congressional Democratic source tells Fox News an unsettled Utah electorate creates a “unique turnout dynamic.” Love seems to be in good shape. But if Love does face trouble, Democrats are creeping close to 30.  California poses its own set of issues.  “Trump is a one-man wrecking crew in California,” said one Democratic operative.  Trump and California’s Senate race could influence what happens in House contests. California allows the top two primary vote getters to run in a general election, regardless of party. California Attorney General Kamala Harris faces Rep. Loretta Sanchez, D-Calif., in a bid to succeed retiring Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif.  “There is no reason for Republicans to go to the polls in the Senate race,” said one Democratic source.  This is why observers are watching Darrell Issa’s race along with competitive contests for Reps. Steve Knight, R-Calif., and Jeff Denham, R-Calif.  And then there’s a wild card. What happens if another Access Hollywood tape materializes?  “We will be at the gates of Hell,” lamented one senior Republican.  Capitol Attitude is a weekly column written by members of the Fox News Capitol Hill team. Their articles take you inside the halls of Congress, and cover the spectrum of policy issues being introduced, debated and voted on there.
Politicians routinely decry hypotheticals. They indignantly proclaim they won’t answer a reporter’s speculative question because it’s contingent upon a “hypothetical” turn of events.  And yet, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., was in full prognostication mode when she met with reporters Wednesday, divining what will unfold in American electoral politics next month.  “Donald Trump is not going to be president of the United States,” Pelosi augured.  When asked later about Hillary Clinton, the Pelosi forecast that the Democratic nominee “will be a great president.” She also declared Clinton “will be the leader of the free world.”  It’s unknown if a Magic 8 Ball assisted Pelosi in her soothsaying. It is decidedly so. Signs point to yes. But she also predicted something else as congressional Republicans abandoned the top of the ticket to focus efforts toward preserving GOP majorities in the House and Senate.  Pelosi invoked the Republican gambit in 1996 when it became apparent former Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kansas, wouldn’t defeat incumbent President Bill Clinton.  “Republicans started talking about ‘checks and balances.’ And you know what that translated into? Impeachment of the president of the United States,” she said.  But when it came to foretelling which party might win the House, and, thereby, if Pelosi might again clutch the speaker’s gavel should Democrats prevail, the oracle of Pacific Heights was not as clairvoyant.  “I think we are in a good place,” Pelosi offered. “I think we will be within single digits either way.”  Ask again later. Cannot predict now. Concentrate and ask again.  Democrats need 30 seats to recapture control of the House for the first time since early 2011. Republicans are scrambling to diminish losses and hold seats all over the map. They’re leery as the Republican nominee Donald Trump’s campaign seemingly disintegrates and he crows about not accepting the election results.  So why cannot Pelosi -- or anyone for that matter -- project what might happen in House contests?  In 2012, Democrats commanded 1.4 million more votes than Republicans for House contests. Yet Democrats picked up only eight states in the House and still stared at a 25 seat deficit.  When the GOP won the House in 2010, Republicans also scored hundreds of victories in state and local races across the country. Those locales determined how to draw new lines for congressional districts following the 2010 Census and the reapportionment of seats. As a result, Republicans drew lines to favor their own.  This created a firewall. Democrats took their best shot and still came up short.  “It’s an obstacle but not insurmountable,” Pelosi said of GOP gerrymandering.  She notes that when Democrats won the House in 2006, they did so despite redistricting that favored Republicans. In particular, she cited efforts in 2004 by then-House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, R-Texas, to redraw lines in the Lone Star State tilted toward the GOP.  This is why the best political handicappers -- Magic 8 Ball or not -- are only willing to commit to a Democratic gain of 20 or so seats on the best of nights. It could be higher. But it is really hard to determine. Turnout is hard to model with Trump at the top of the ticket.  Reply hazy. Try again.  That said, there is one clear item on the Magic 8 Ball. If Republicans do maintain the House, Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., faces a challenging path.  Trump has repeatedly knocked Ryan in recent days after the speaker yanked the nominee’s invitation to appear at a Wisconsin political rally. Trump now appears poised to partly blame Ryan if he loses the election.  Moreover, Ryan faces internal party squabbles about how he handled Trump. Ryan took heat early last week during a conference call for saying he would focus only on congressional contests.  “He grossly miscalculated the situation,” said one GOP lawmaker to Fox. “This was a big mistake for Paul the way he played it. You can’t give a middle finger to primary voters.”  Fox is told that rank-and-file Republicans perceive Ryan of having “unnecessarily waded into this. He thought he was being nuanced and he got his head ripped off.”  Some pro-Trump lawmakers will hold the Trump clash against Ryan. There’s an increasingly likely scenario that Trump devotees may not be chastened by a loss in November.  Ironically, Trump supporters could emerge emboldened, believing the system is “rigged,” the outcome is invalid and Ryan represents the core of the “Washington establishment.”  At the very least, House Republicans will hold a smaller majority. The House Freedom Caucus will comprise a larger percentage of the GOP. That’s why members of the Freedom Caucus held a call Friday to discuss the possibility of fielding a challenger to run against Ryan.  The House Republican Conference would first vote internally in mid-November. The actual vote for speaker wouldn’t take place until January 3 before the full House.  But what does Ryan do if he’s speaker in the next Congress and dealing with the possibility of a President Clinton? Does he pull a page out of the GOP’s 2009 playbook and vow to oppose everything the incipient president proposes?  That could ingratiate the speaker to Republican skeptics -- in both the Trump camp and the Freedom Caucus camp. But Ryan will need to work with Democrats to keep the government open and also sidestep a potentially calamitous melee in March over the debt ceiling.  Of course, daring to work with Democrats could be a death knell for Ryan. Then again, it could be an opportunity for smart politics if Clinton runs up the electoral college scoreboard and trounces Trump.  The question centers on what sort of an agenda a potential President Clinton may propound.  Just as The Magic 8 Ball labors to predict the House, control of the Senate is also murky. A Clinton shellacking could have Democrats up several seats in the Senate. Or, the party’s might be separated by just a seat or two.  And come January, everyone could have Georgia on their mind.  Sen. Johnny Isakson, R-Ga., is not expected to lose in November. But what if he loses in January?  Huh?  If things are tight, Senate control could come down to a race decided not this fall but early this coming winter. Washington could realize such a scenario if the Senate is potentially held by one party or another by a single seat.  The Peach State requires candidates secure 50.1 percent to avoid a runoff. GOP sources tell Fox they are sure Isakson will struggle to top 50 percent against Democratic challenger Jim Barksdale in November. An Atlanta Journal-Constitution poll out Friday shows Isakson scoring 47 percent and Barksdale clocking in at 32 percent. Libertarian Allen Buckley could be the spoiler, polling at 11 percent.  That helps propel the runoff scenario. Moreover, Hillary Clinton is making a push to flip Georgia this fall. Democrats are gaining traction, bolstered by changing demographics in the state.  Here’s the rub: The runoff for Georgia is January 10. That’s a week after the start of the 115th Congress. Thus, there’s a possibility that in such a closely contested presidential election year, the Georgia runoff could either settle control of the Senate or tie it up. It’s plausible one party could start with a majority on January 3 and face relegation to the minority a week later.  Fox rates the seat as a solid Republican hold. But both sides could pour every possible nickel into a runoff if it determines which side controls the Senate.  Georgia’s been down this road before in presidential years. The late GOP Sen. Paul Coverdell unseated Democratic Sen. Wyche Fowler in a 1992 runoff. And Republican Sen. Saxby Chambliss managed to hold his seat in a 2008 runoff against Democrat Jim Martin.  Regardless, political analysts interpret a runoff as the first referendum on the new president.  A potential President Clinton wouldn’t be able to propound much of a “liberal” agenda with such a narrow margin in the Senate -- or perhaps no majority at all. What happens in the first few months of 2017 will impact the midterm elections of 2018.  A Clinton administration would be mindful to protect vulnerable Democratic incumbents from battleground or conservative states facing reelection in two years: Sens. Sherrod Brown, Ohio; Claire McCaskill, Missouri; Jon Tester, Montana; Joe Donnelly, Indiana; and Heidi Heitkamp, North Dakota.  That’s to say nothing of inoculating an appointed Democratic senator to succeed vice-presidential nominee Sen. Tim Kaine, D-Va., who would face a special election in 2017. The Virginia seat would also be up in 2018 should Kaine matriculate to the vice presidency.  So what will happen?  Cannot predict now. Better not tell you now. Ask again later.  Perhaps on November 8?  Even then the answers may remain elusive.
It’s unclear if Donald Trump has ever heard of Thucydides let alone read his 400 BC tome “The History of the Peloponnesian War.” But Thucydides certainly said something that would resonate with Trump should Hillary Clinton defeat the GOP nominee in November.  “Someone who fails to get elected to office can always console himself with the thought that there was something not quite fair about it,” proclaimed Thucydides.  “I will look at it at the time,” said Trump when asked by Fox News’ Chris Wallace if he could accept the election results. “I’ll keep you in suspense.”  “That’s horrifying,” countered Clinton. “He is denigrating – he’s talking down our democracy.”  Clinton countered Trump about his own bellyaching when he failed to capture an Emmy for “The Apprentice.”  “Should have gotten it,” Trump snapped.  You’d think the Palm Beach County Canvassing Board was involved in the perceived snub. Good thing Wallace didn’t ask Trump if the Dodgers’ Adrian Gonzalez was safe or out at home in last night’s playoff game.  Peaceful transfer of power on Jan. 20? Exercise in democracy? Transition of government? Those days are SO Bush v. Gore.  Will Trump respect the outcome of the election? The country’s future hangs in the balance … to say nothing of the chads. To Trump, election corruption is so rampant you’d need a big, red Ken Bone sweater to cover it up.  It’s hard to imagine how Trump could possibly make things more challenging for Republican House and Senate candidates prior to the final debate. But his remark undermining the electoral system did just that.  Republicans are fighting to maintain control of the Senate. Even the House may be in play. Trump’s “wait and see” approach automatically puts all GOPers on the defensive. Reporters will hound GOP candidates to determine if they support Trump’s suggestion. This contorts Republican candidates already waging nip-and-tuck campaigns to address conspiracy theories. That deprives those Republicans of precious opportunities to discuss bread and butter issues in the waning days of the campaign.  Does Trump’s stance present an opening for other candidates to argue the results are a sham? Will sitting members of Congress dispute the results? And if voters believe it is a sham, well, the whole shooting match is over…  Or, ominously, perhaps just beginning.  This spells another headache for House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis. Just days ago, Ryan spokeswoman AshLee Strong declared that the American system “relies on confidence in election results and the Speaker is fully confident the states will carry out this election with integrity.”  Voters may have their say on Nov. 8. But even when done by the book, this election is far from over. Trump has an opportunity to build “suspense” as he ponders the results.  Electors for the candidate who carried each state will huddle in early December to cast electoral votes. Results of that tally compose the Electoral College. Each secretary of state then certifies the results and ships multiple “Certificates of Vote” via registered mail to the U.S. Senate, the Archivist of the U.S. and the local federal court. In early January, the House and Senate convene a Joint Session of Congress to tabulate the Electoral College.  This is far from a fait accompli. All it takes is a sole House member and a sole senator to mutually contest a state’s electoral choice. The House and Senate then dissolve into their individual bodies to settle whether those electoral votes are valid.  Following the 2000 Florida election dispute, multiple members of the Congressional Black Caucus petitioned the Joint Session to challenge the Sunshine State’s electoral slate. But no senator joined the entreaty. Rep. Maxine Waters, D-Calif., protested that she didn’t “care” that no senator advocated a deeper review.  Vice President Al Gore – who ironically presided over the Joint Session in his role as president of the Senate – famously chastised the California Democrat.  “The chair would advise that the rules do care,” Gore lectured Waters.  In January 2005, the late Rep. Stephanie Tubbs Jones, D-Ohio, teamed with Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., to contest Ohio’s electoral slate. But the House and Senate certified Ohio’s vote after a short debate.  This is why the integrity of all elections are crucial. The House and Senate are the ultimate arbiters of which candidate secures the presidency. Which party controls the House and Senate is already a coin flip. Imagine questions about the vote’s integrity if people don’t accept that one party holds the House or Senate by a handful of seats – exacerbated by Trump’s potential take on the outcome.  There are lots of opportunities for someone to create doubt at any of these stages, regardless of the Nov. 8 result. There’s a real problem if people don’t sign on.  These days, Trump orchestrates “suspense.” As Thucydides said, a candidate can “console himself with the thought there was something not quite fair” about an election. But what Thucydides didn’t say is that a candidate has the ability to stoke public opinion that the system is rigged.  Capitol Attitude is a weekly column written by members of the Fox News Capitol Hill team. Their articles take you inside the halls of Congress, and cover the spectrum of policy issues being introduced, debated and voted on there.
When Rep. Paul Ryan of Wisconsin initially balked at accepting the House speakership last fall, it was widely understood that his biggest headaches would come from the staunchly conservative members of the Republican conference, such as the lawmakers in the Freedom Caucus, who had routinely made life miserable for Ryan’s predecessor, John Boehner.  Instead, as Ryan closes out his first year as the top elected Republican in Congress, he finds himself at odds with the Republican Party’s controversial nominee for president, and struggling to navigate intra-party tensions that make what Boehner endured seem quaint by contrast.  “Paul Ryan is my friend,” GOP vice presidential nominee Mike Pence said on “Fox and Friends.” “But honestly, I'd like to see Republican leaders supporting the Republican nominee for president of the United States.”  Pence’s comments came shortly before Ryan addressed a group of College Republicans in Madison, Wisconsin, the speaker’s home state and the latest setting for Ryan’s high-wire act, which sees him balancing obligations to down-ballot candidates with the traditional support a speaker offers to his party’s nominee.  Facing growing discontent among his own conference for his recent treatment of Trump – whom the speaker effectively abandoned on Monday, following the release of an old audio tape on which Trump could be heard making lewd comments about kissing and groping women – Ryan lashed out at Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, calling her agenda for America “arrogant” and “condescending.”  In the America Clinton will refashion in her image, Ryan added, “There is no room to run, no chance to grow, or to fail for that matter. People are not needed, they are counted and sorted. This is how you can so casually classify whole groups of people as ‘baskets of deplorables.’”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  In the same set of remarks, however, Ryan brandished the six-point policy plan that he and the GOP conference have developed over the course of the year and declared, “This is our party's vision for America” – a subtle but unmistakable assertion that Trump is not the face of today’s Republican Party.  And during the question-and-answer session, Ryan again appeared to keep his distance from the nominee: “I know many people are still making their choice. I know some people are avoiding making any choice at all. And I don't begrudge anybody for that.”  Trump, for his part, has alternated between vowing to work “arm in arm” with Ryan to defeat the “Obama-Clinton disaster" and blasting the speaker last Tuesday, in a Twitter post, as “weak,” “ineffective” and “disloyal.”  “If you sneeze, [Ryan] calls up and announces, 'Isn't that a terrible thing?'” Trump told Bill O’Reilly on “The O’Reilly Factor” that evening. “So look, I don't want his support, I don't care about his support.”  Ryan’s difficulties since taking office – manifest, for example, in the Republicans’ failure to bring a budget to the floor, an acute embarrassment for a speaker who formerly served as chairman of the budget committee – underscore the growing rift between GOP leaders and the GOP base. That rift was only magnified by the Republican electorate’s embrace of Trump in the primary season, when the real estate billionaire, a recent convert to conservatism, drew some 14 million votes, a record.  Republican leaders, however, have bristled at Trump’s mercurial style and ideological heresies, and have downright recoiled from his occasional use of vulgar language and the latest controversy to hit his campaign: the flood of allegations this week by women claiming Trump made unwanted sexual advances on them over the years, allegations the candidate has dismissed as lies.  Some have suggested that Ryan could have handled the difficult situation better; his disavowal of Trump on Monday, in response to the lewd audio recording, came on the day after Trump turned in a strong debate performance against Clinton and appeared, to many eyes, to have recovered from the controversy, or at least to have made up some lost ground.  “Paul Ryan didn't need to do that,” said Fred Barnes, executive editor of the Weekly Standard, in an interview for “On the Record” with Brit Hume on October 10. “You know who doesn't do that and I think probably has the same generally low opinion of Trump as Paul Ryan does? And that's Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader.”  Most analysts, however, see Ryan – whose speakership has also included some successes, such as resolution of the so-called “doc fix” hole in Medicare funding and a bipartisan measure addressing Puerto Rico’s debt – contending with singular challenges that even Boehner, toppled by opponents from within his own conference, did not have to confront.  “Ryan is having a terrible time in this Trump chokehold,” said A.B. Stoddard, associate editor and columnist at RealClearPolitics. “If he distances himself permanently and completely from Trump, he fears – and his members fear – Trump voters will not turn out. They'll come and only vote for the top of the ticket, they won't support down-ballot Republicans, and that could imperil the majorities in the House and the Senate.  “If he embraces him,” Stoddard added, “in a way to try to enthuse those voters – as more and more allegations of groping and other sort of scandalous revelations come to the fore – it makes it more likely there is a Democratic wave in the House, and Ryan could lose his majority that way. So he really is in an untenable position.”    James Rosen joined Fox News Channel (FNC) in 1999. He currently serves as the chief Washington correspondent and hosts the online show "The Foxhole." His latest book is "A Torch Kept Lit: Great Lives of the Twentieth Century" (Crown Forum, October 4, 2016).
Opponents to Donald Trump’s presidency are planning large-scale demonstrations in the nation’s capital in January when the Republican president-elect is sworn in on Inauguration Day, with police apparently expecting tens-of-thousands of protesters.  Trump’s surprise win Tuesday over Democratic rival Hillary Clinton has already sparked smaller protests across the county. However, demonstrations being planned for Inauguration Day weekend, which includes the Jan. 20 swearing-in on Capitol Hill, have the potential to be much larger.  One protest is being organized by the group ANSWER, for Act Now to Stop War & End Racism.  The group’s Facebook page announcing its “Protest at the Inauguration: Stand Against Trump, War, Racism and Inequality" event on Saturday showed that nearly 7,000 people have already committed to attending and 24,000 more have expressing interest in the event.  A Metropolitan Police Department officer said Friday that officers have already been briefed about the proposed demonstration and to prepare for at least 30,000 protesters.  An MPD spokesman on Saturday declined to discuss the matter, saying the agency doesn’t talk about “deploying resources.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  He also suggested that the event was too far off to provide specifics but added the agency will “plan accordingly.”  And a pro-Clinton group named “RoaRR 4 Hillary” is planning a “Million Women March” on Jan. 21.  ANSWER, started roughly 15 years ago, after the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks, and has the potential to attract hundreds of thousands of protesters.  In January 2013, the group led an antiwar protest that it says brought 200,000 people to Washington, D.C. And two months later, ANSWER helped organize a similar worldwide event that is considered the biggest anti-war protest in history.  Trump was criticized during his historic outsider campaign for comments about women and illegal Mexican immigrants and for his proposal after recent terror attacks connected to radical Islamists to temporarily ban Muslims trying to enter the United States.  Already this week, a man was shot in Portland, Oregon, when he got into a confrontation with a protester.  Portland police said the person who was shot was taken to a hospital for treatment of injuries that were not life-threatening. Police said they were looking for the shooter, who apparently fled in his vehicle after the attack early Saturday morning.  The shooting followed rowdy Friday night protests, when police used tear gas in response to "burning projectiles" thrown at officers, police said on Twitter. Hundreds of people marched through the city, disrupting traffic and spray-painting graffiti.  Authorities reported instances of vandalism and assault during a rally that organizers had billed as peaceful earlier in the day.  In other parts of the country, spirited demonstrations on college campuses and peaceful marches along downtown streets have taken place since Wednesday. In Washington, protesters burn at least one U.S. flag, which resulted in confrontation with a military veteran.  And people continue to protest at Trump’s new luxury hotel in Washington, Trump International, just blocks from the White House.  A mainly peaceful protest by about 3,000 people ended in Los Angeles early Saturday with about 200 arrests for failure to disperse after police broke up the lingering demonstration.  Hundreds joined a Friday afternoon "love rally" in Washington Square Park in Manhattan.  Evening marches disrupted traffic in Miami and Atlanta.  Trump supporter Nicolas Quirico was traveling from South Beach to Miami. His car was among hundreds stopped when protesters blocked Interstate 395.  "Trump will be our president. There is no way around that, and the sooner people grasp that, the better off we will be," he said. "There is a difference between a peaceful protest and standing in a major highway backing up traffic for 5 miles. This is wrong."  More than a thousand protesters took to the streets across California after night fell including downtown Los Angeles, where over 200 were arrested a night earlier. In Bakersfield, where Trump is far more popular than in most of the state, some held signs reading "Anti-Trump, Pro-USA."  Small protests also were held in Detroit; Minneapolis; Kansas City, Missouri; Olympia, Washington and Iowa City.  More than 200 people, carrying signs gathered on the steps of the Washington state Capitol. The group chanted "not my president" and "no Trump, no KKK, no fascist USA."  In Tennessee, Vanderbilt University students sang civil rights songs and marched through campus across a Nashville street, temporarily blocking traffic. A protest also occurred in Minneapolis.  In Chicago, multiple groups planned protests through Saturday.  Ashley Lynne Nagel, 27, said she joined a Thursday night demonstration in Denver.  "I have a leader I fear for the first time in my life," said Nagel, a Bernie Sanders supporter who voted for Hillary Clinton.  "It's not that we're sore losers," she said. "It's that we are genuinely upset, angry, terrified that a platform based off of racism, xenophobia and homophobia has become so powerful and now has complete control of our representation."  Demonstrations also were planned Saturday in Las Vegas, Los Angeles and other areas.  Previous demonstrations drew thousands of people in New York and other large urban centers. The largely peaceful demonstrations were overshadowed by sporadic episodes of vandalism, violence and street-blocking.  The Associated Press contributed to this report.
The publisher of The New York Times penned a letter to readers Friday promising that the paper would “reflect” on its coverage of this year’s election while rededicating itself to reporting on “America and the world” honestly.  Arthur O. Sulzberger Jr., the paper’s embattled publisher, appealed to Times readers for their continued support.  “We cannot deliver the independent, original journalism for which we are known without the loyalty of our subscribers,” the letter states.  Letter to NYT readers from Arthur Sulzberger Jr. and Dean Baquet pic.twitter.com/jORqzx3BA9 — Sydney Ember (@melbournecoal) November 11, 2016  New York Post columnist and former Times reporter Michael Goodwin wrote, "because it (The Times) demonized Trump from start to finish, it failed to realize he was onto something. And because the paper decided that Trump’s supporters were a rabble of racist rednecks and homophobes, it didn’t have a clue about what was happening in the lives of the Americans who elected the new president.  Sulzbergers letter was released after the paper’s public editor, Liz Spayd, took the paper to task for its election coverage. She pointed out how its polling feature Upshot gave Hillary Clinton an 84 percent chance as voters went to the polls.  She compared stories that the paper ran about President-elect Donald Trump and Clinton, where the paper made Clinton look functional and organized and the Trump discombobulated.  The NYT would do well to plant some roots in Red America https://t.co/HDd4SFJqtq — Liz Spayd (@spaydl) November 9, 2016  Spayd wrote, “Readers are sending letters of complaint at a rapid rate. Here’s one that summed up the feelings succinctly, from Kathleen Casey of Houston: “Now, that the world has been upended and you are all, to a person, in a state of surprise and shock, you may want to consider whether you should change your focus from telling the reader what and how to think, and instead devote yourselves to finding out what the reader (and nonreaders) actually think.”  She wrote about another reader who asked that the paper should focus on the electorate instead of “pushing the limited agenda of your editors.”  “Please come down from your New York City skyscraper and join the rest of us.”  Sulzberger—who insisted that the paper covered both candidates fairly-- also sent a note to staffers on Friday reminding the newsroom to “give the news impartially, without fear or favor.”  “But we also approach the incoming Trump administration without bias,” he said.
Voters upset that Republican Donald Trump had been elected president -- or think that the presidency was unfairly taken from Democratic rival Hillary Clinton -- are scrambling for ways to change the results.  Their major focus is trying to get members of the U.S. Electoral College to change their vote, arguing that Clinton should be the next president because 60.47 Americans voted for her, compared to 60 million for Trump.  The college is part of the Constitution and is composed of 538 members, with each state and the District of Columbia having one member, or electorate, for every senator or House lawmaker.  Trump won 290 of the so-called electoral votes, in the race to get a minimum 270.  However, members don’t officially cast their ballots until December 19, which has Trump opponents making long-shot efforts to reverse the outcome, including petition drives to get the electorates to switch their votes.  The largest effort is through the website Change.org, which as of Saturday has about 3 million signatures, getting closer to its goal of 4.5 million.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Petition organizers argue on the site that some states don’t require their electorates to vote for the presidential nominee who had the most votes in their state.  And for electorates in states that by law require them to ballot for the nominee who won the most votes, “their vote would still be counted, they would simply pay a small fine,” the organizers write. “We can be sure Clinton supporters will be glad to pay!”  One online petition signer wrote on the site via Twitter: “It’s our chance of getting Trump out of the whitehouse.”  Another grassroots petition drive is being launched by Faithlessnow.com, as reported by Yahoo News.  Organizers in that drive are targeting roughly 160 Republican electorates in the 15 states that Trump won and don’t have laws bounding the electorates to the winner: Arizona, Arkansas, Georgia, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Utah and West Virginia.  The most recent presidential election in which a nominee won the popular vote but lost the election through the Electoral College vote was 2000, when Democrat Al Gore lost to Republican George W. Bush following a days-long recount of votes in Florida and other states.  Clinton and Trump at the time purportedlycalled for an end to the entire Electoral College system. And renewed calls emerged after Election Day 2016, on Tuesday, in large part because voters think the system is no longer needed to safeguard the country from a dangerous president.  A Baltimore Sun editorial this weekend called the college a “convoluted system” and “the product of an 18th century compromise forged over issues that no longer apply and resting on assumptions about the wisdom of the average person we no longer hold.”  “It is not worked the way it was intended almost from the very beginning,” continued the editorial, which also suggests that U.S. states follow Maryland’s lead by essentially joining a movement that could side-step needing a constitutional amendment to change the system.
Former first daughter Chelsea Clinton reportedly is being mooted as a future congressional candidate.  The New York Post reported that Clinton, 36, is being eyed to take Rep. Nita Lowey's place when the 79-year-old incumbent decides to leave the House of Representatives.  Lowey represents New York's 17th District, which covers part of Westchester County, including Bill and Hillary Clinton's hometown of Chappaqua. The Post reported that the Clintons have purchased the home next door to theirs, in which they plan to install Chelsea, her husband and their two children.  Chelsea Clinton currently lives, and is registered to vote, in Manhattan. She introduced Hillary Clinton when her mother accepted the Democratic nomination for president at this summer's national convention in Philadelphia.  "Chelsea would be the next extension of the Clinton brand," the Post quoted a source as saying. "While politics isn’t the life Hillary wanted for Chelsea, she chose to go on the campaign trail for her mother and has turned out to be very poised, articulate and comfortable with the visibility."  Chelsea herself has not ruled out seeking public office, telling Buzzfeed in 2014 that "I find it pretty discouraging that almost none of my friends think about running for public office as an option."  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Click for more from the New York Post.
A disturbing viral video of a mom kicking her 7-year-old son out of the house for voting for Donald Trump in a mock election at school has prompted Texas authorities to investigate the woman for child abuse.  KPRC-TV reported Friday that the woman, who can be heard yelling, even cursing, at the boy who is visibly upset, was interviewed by Fort Bend County’s Sheriff’s Office and Child Protective Services after she posted the video on her Facebook page.  VIDEO CONTAINS GRAPHIC LANGUAGE  “Since you voted for Trump, you can get your s—t and get out,” the woman is heard saying to the boy as she records the video on a cellphone. As of Friday the video had been shared more than 200,000 times, sparking outrage and demands that she be locked up. “Uh, uh, the suitcase is packed by the door.”  The boy bawls uncontrollably as he’s shown to the door with the suitcase and a handmade sign that says, “My mom kicked me out because I voted for Donald Trump.”  “Bye Donald Trump lover,” she is heard saying.  Later in the video the boy stands on the sidewalk with the signand tells the camera he voted for Trump because saw him a lot on TV.  The station reported that the video, which is nearly five minutes-long, was tough to watch, even tougher to understand. Neighbors who live on the woman’s block in the town of Fresno told the station the video left them angry and appalled.  Detective Joe Luera of the Fort Bend Sheriff’s Office told the station that as disturbing as the video is, investigators haven’t found evidence of a crime. He said the investigation was continuing.  Luera told another station, KTRK-TV, that he met the family and saw the boy who appeared to be in good health.  “She explains it was a joke,” he told the station.  She told the station the same thing on the phone.  The station reported that the woman agreed to be interviewed on camera but then changed her mind.
An 18-year-old is expected to take office in January as Forrest County's next District 1 election commissioner.  Local media reports that teenager Tyler Wood beat out incumbent Charlie Phillips during the Tuesday balloting.  Wood, who's a student at Pearl River Community College in Hattiesburg, says he'll be up to the job despite his age. He says it's not about how old you are, it's about having the "integrity, the knowledge and the experience" to do the job.  Wood says he got interested in the job while helping out during Forrest County's recent primaries.  Gwen Wilks, the county's circuit clerk, says the unofficial results show Wood with about 300 votes more than his opponent. Affidavit ballots are still being counted but she said it's unlikely to change the results.
Donald Trump's election has thrust Chris Christie into a powerful role as chairman of the president-elect's transition team -- but the governor's growing political baggage has left his own prospects for landing a plum post in the Trump administration in doubt.  So far, Christie's early and unwavering loyalty to Trump ever since the primary campaign has been rewarded. There are no public indications his transition team post is in jeopardy, and Trump expressed gratitude for the New Jersey governor's support in his election night acceptance speech.  “Governor Chris Christie, folks, was unbelievable,” Trump said. “Thank you, Chris.”  Trump, after all, knew Christie was politically wounded when he tapped the governor for the vital transition role back in May. Then, Christie was deep in the fallout surrounding “Bridgegate” – the scandal involving members of Christie’s staff who shut down several lanes of the George Washington Bridge in September 2013 in order to punish a political rival.  However, in just the past month, two more aides were found guilty of involvement in a trial where Christie's own knowledge of the closures repeatedly was called into question.  The case has been a significant drag on Christie’s reputation, with a recent poll finding the governor’s approval rating has sunk to just 21 percent.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  "Trump is loyal to his team that helped get him elected. However, the louder the volume in the media about Christie being a liability, the more precarious it will be,” Republican strategist Ron Bonjean told FoxNews.com.  Another hurdle for Christie is potential opposition from Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner. As a U.S. attorney, Christie prosecuted Jared’s father Charles for witness tampering, tax evasion and illegal campaign contributions – which led to him serving 14 months in jail.  Kushner’s influence in Trump’s inner circle cannot be overstated. In Trump’s first meeting with President Obama Thursday, Kushner was seen taking a private walk with White House chief of staff Denis McDonough, indicating an enduring role for Kushner as Trump prepares to take office. In July, there were multiple reports that Kushner had been key in dissuading his father-in-law from picking Christie as running mate.  While Christie has been floated as a possible attorney general pick, Bonjean questioned whether he'd get through Senate confirmation. The Senate will remain in Republican hands next year, but their majority is slim.  “The transition position is such a short-term assignment that if Trump were to name him to a Cabinet post, the key is whether Christie could survive Senate confirmation because of his Bridgegate troubles. If it looks like a dark prospect, Christie may be asked to take on an outside advisory role,” Bonjean said.  Christie, however, has maintained his innocence in the bridge scandal and said on "The Today Show" Thursday that the trial’s outcome vindicated his actions in the wake of the scandal.  “What happened last week with the verdict was they confirmed what I knew and what I did in January of 2014 ... it’s my view there were three people responsible for what happened there,” he said, before noting it was those three who were found guilty.  Christie, once the rising star of the Republican Party, has steadily seen his popularity and status in the party itself decline since the 2012 election.  Though he comfortably won re-election in 2013, he was then hit by the Bridgegate scandal in early 2014. He struggled to gain traction in the 2016 presidential primaries and took heat in some corners for endorsing Trump so soon after dropping out. Others accused him of ignoring his responsibilities in New Jersey in order to dabble in national politics.  At the same time, Christie is now among a select group of high-profile Republicans who whole-heartedly backed the winning candidate.  Pollster Adam Geller, who has done polling for both Christie and the Trump campaign, told FoxNews.com he doesn’t believe Christie’s low numbers will hurt him in the eyes of the new president-elect.  “Governor Christie’s approvals aren’t what they were two years ago. But in terms of the importance of public polling, President-elect Trump just won an election where polls said he’d lose -- he will pay no mind as to what those polls say about Governor Christie in New Jersey.”  Geller said that Trump places a lot of value on loyalty, and that bodes well for Christie not only in the months ahead, but for a possible post in the new Trump administration. The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday that Christie was being discussed for a possible job as attorney general, as part of a list being drawn up by the transition team to fill posts in the new administration.  “I would speculate that President-elect Trump rewards loyalty and there are few people who have been as loyal as Governor Christie,” he said.  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
The data-deleting software known as BleachBit, made famous by the Clinton team’s use of it to scrub emails from the former secretary of state's private email server, is making the most of its time in the spotlight – and is now selling special “cloths” featuring the Democratic nominee herself.  The item is called the “Cloth or Something” -- a reference to an Aug. 18, 2015, response Clinton gave when asked by Fox News’ Ed Henry if she had wiped her private email server.  “What, like with a cloth or something?” Clinton quipped, making a scrubbing motion with her hand.  That “cloth” turned out to be BleachBit -- a powerful software tool that includes the ability to “shred files to hide their contents and prevent data recovery,” according to BleachBit's website. Rep. Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., who revealed the Clinton team’s use of the software in August this year, said it deleted files so completely that “even God can’t read them” -- a quote Bleachbit now proudly uses as an endorsement.  Now, the company is making the most of its high-profile in the media and the presidential race, selling cloths that bear Clinton’s face, and the now-famous quote.  “After you have smashed your BlackBerry, don't forget to wipe the fingerprints from your email server with this non-abrasive, soft microfiber Cloth or Something,” the site says. “Don't wait for a subpoena: order now!”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Bleachbit founder Andrew Ziem, who offers customers the option to have him sign the cloths, told FoxNews.com via email Wednesday that he has been staggered by the demand, which is causing him some concerns as he doesn’t want to disappoint people.  “Sales have come in waves. There was a boost after the second presidential debate and a bigger wave after FBI Director James Comey reopened the investigation on Friday,” Ziem said.  RELATED: FBI RELEASES DOCUMENTS ON BILL CLINTON'S 2001 PARDON OF FINANCIER RICH  “A few days ago I had just reordered the cloths from the printer and was mostly keeping up with signing them, but yesterday sales went through the roof. I panicked as I saw them selling out so fast because I do not like back orders, and I don't know how I am going to sign them all,” he said.  The cloths are available for $3 each, or $5 with Ziem’s autograph. They are currently back ordered until Nov. 14.  Ziem said the idea initially started off as a bit of a joke, but eventually he got around to making a design and actually ordering them. However, the demand has been so high that it’s getting in the way of Ziem’s main job -- creating BleachBit itself.  “'The Cloth or Something' project has been fun, but it has also been a distraction from the software development needed to get out the next release of the BleachBit software application,” he said.  Ziem isn’t the first to capitalize on Clinton’s email woes with a cheeky product. During his presidential primary campaign, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., offered supporters the opportunity to buy “Hillary’s hard drive” for $100, which it promised was “perfectly clean.”  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
A rash of reports are emerging on social media from Texas residents who claim machines have switched their votes from Donald Trump to Hillary Clinton – though local officials are pushing back and saying many of these incidents are due to human error.  Early voting began Monday in the Lone Star State, and almost immediately reports began trickling in of votes being changed. The controversy began when Lisa Houlette, a Texas resident in Randall County, posted her story on Facebook.  Arlington resident Shandy Clarke said a similar thing had happened to a family member who went to vote Republican Monday.  But Randall County’s Election Administrator Shannon Lackey told FoxNews.com that these sort of claims occur every election cycle and that there is nothing wrong with the machines. She believes such incidents can be chalked up to human error.  “Our machines are state and federally certified. We do three logic and accuracy tests, which were done before military voting started in September,” she said.  Lackey said her office is dedicated to impartiality and fairness, and she even chose not to vote in the state’s primaries so there could be no accusations of bias. She also noted that at repeated points in the voting process, users see where their vote will be cast, and they can change it at any point.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  “I also have instructed all early voting workers, if a voter is uncomfortable that they are to cancel the ballot immediately, and let the voter cast again, and choose the machine of their choice. They can even get the clerk to act as a witness,” she said.  Neighboring Potter County Judge Nancy Tanner released a statement Tuesday claiming there is nothing wrong with the machines.  TEXAS SEES SURGE IN EARLY VOTING AS POLLS SHOW TIGHTENING RACE  “They do not flip your vote. They do not flip parties. Humans do that,” she said.  Still, she referenced “one incident in Randall County where a voter voted straight ticket and when they hit the vote button, it flipped parties.” Tanner maintained that the machine was checked and there was nothing wrong with it.  In Collin County, elections official Bruce Sherbet told The Dallas Morning News that there were complaints, but they were called in after the voters had left the polling place, and so it was not possible to determine what had happened.  Officials did acknowledge one minor software issue in Chamber County, when officials temporarily moved to paper ballots Monday after a glitch was found in machines.  12NewsNow reported that an error caused votes for one appeals court race not to be entered when a voter tried to vote for a straight-party ticket. That glitch has since been fixed, and there was no indication the error favored one party over another.  Meanwhile in North Carolina, WFMY reported that there had been "a smattering" of complaints about machines wrongly indentifying voter choices, but those ballots were corrected before being cast.  Yet some conservatives have seized on the claims as proof the voting system is rigged.  “You see the garbage that goes on and it has to stop,” Eric Trump, son of Republican candidate Donald Trump, told Fox & Friends Wednesday when asked about the situation in Texas. “We have to get it right, we’re better than that as a country.”  A new American Values Survey, reported by The Washington Examiner, found that just 4 in 10 voters are very confident their vote will be counted accurately. Donald Trump has repeatedly asserted that he fears the vote will be “rigged” and has held back from promising to accept the election results, telling Fox News’ Chris Wallace at the third presidential debate: “I will keep you in suspense.”  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
The Obama administration is trying to calm the panic over soaring ObamaCare premiums by pointing to subsidies many will receive to offset the cost -- but analysts and GOP lawmakers counter that those subsidies nevertheless will stick taxpayers with a rising bill.  With enrollment set to begin Nov. 1, the administration announced Monday that premiums are set rise an average of 25 percent across the 39 states served by the federally run online market. Some states, such as Arizona, will see premiums jump by as much as 116 percent.  Department of Health and Human Services officials are stressing that subsidies provided under the law, which are designed to rise alongside premiums, will insulate most customers from sticker shock.  But the rising cost of subsidies, which already totals tens of billions a year, would be passed on to the taxpayer.  “Taxpayers are already in for a lot,” Tom Miller, resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, told FoxNews.com. “The cost doesn’t go away, it just goes into someone else’s pocket.”  In a March report, the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office estimated that subsidies given to enrollees in 2016 would amount to $43 billion in 2016, and predicted the cost would rise to $106 billion by 2026. It also said that over 10 years, ObamaCare provisions would reduce the deficit thanks to tax provisions and cuts to Medicare.  That was before the latest announcement by the administration. It's unclear how exactly the looming premium hikes will affect that picture, though Republicans are now seeking new estimates.  Analysts say it's safe to assume taxpayer costs will rise. Miller noted that HHS reported an average subsidy of $291 per month in 2016. A 25 percent increase in premiums would theoretically translate into an extra $73 per month, or about $870 a year per person.  “If you assume conservatively that there’s 10 million people getting subsidies, that’s an extra $8.5 billion in extra costs taxpayers are getting hit by going into next year,” he said.  Other experts warned this is likely to continue as long as premiums keep rising.  “Its real simple, premiums are going up and up, and subsidies are going to go up with them,” Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum and a former CBO director, told FoxNews.com.  The Department for Health and Human Services, when asked for comment by FoxNews.com, noted that the law’s coverage provisions are set to cost 28 percent less in 2019 than the CBO originally projected, amounting to about $49 billion less than originally predicted when the law was signed in 2010.  A spokesman also said the same office predicted that repealing the law would increase the deficit by approximately $350 billion over 10 years.  Holtz-Eakin urged caution on the administration’s analysis.  “It’s been a mixed pattern, because the enrollments haven’t been what they expected so it hasn’t been as big of an impact financially,” he said. “The bad news is that spending per person is much higher than anticipated due to subsidy increases because of premium hikes.”  One of the biggest ObamaCare costs to taxpayers has been absorbed into the Medicaid budget, paid for by both state and federal governments.  As a sweetener to get states to go along with the plan, the federal government offered to pick up the cost of expanding Medicaid eligibility up to 133 percent of the poverty line. That siphoned low income -- and expensive – customers away from ObamaCare exchanges, seemingly contributing to its current solvency. But that cost – in the hundreds of billions -- also is borne by taxpayers.  The CBO projected in 2013 that, in part due to ObamaCare, federal Medicaid spending would more than double over the next 10 years, topping $554 billion by 2023. State governments pay another $160 billion toward Medicaid.  “Volume has been greater in Medicaid, and per person costs have been much higher than expected,” Edmund Haislmaier, senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation, told FoxNews.com.  Sensing a spike in taxpayer costs, the Republican-led House Committee on Energy and Commerce has written to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services demanding how much taxpayer money will be spent subsidizing the cost of rising premiums.  “While the Administration continues to focus on premium 'affordability,' it ignores the undeniable fact that federal taxpayers are subsidizing these premium increases through tax credits,” the letter from Chairman Fred Upton, R-Mich., says. "The Committee is concerned that the federal taxpayer continues to bear the burden of subsidizing the growing cost of health care insurance.”  The committee is demanding estimates of the amount of money spent covering rising premiums by Nov. 7.  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
FBI documents released Monday include an allegation that Hillary Clinton took lamps and furniture from her State Department office for her home in Washington, D.C., echoing a similar controversy that dogged the Clintons in 2001 -- but the State Department says the furniture always belonged to Clinton.  The claim surfaced in an interview with an unnamed agent who served on Clinton’s security detail when she was secretary of state. The interview formed part of the FBI’s investigation into Clinton’s use of a private email server to conduct department business.  During the interview, which focused mainly on her treatment of staff and her adherence to security protocols, the agent said Clinton and her staff were observed taking items from the State Department.  “Early in Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state, she and her staff were observed removing lamps and furniture from the State Department which were transported to her residence in Washington, D.C.,” the summary of the interview says.  “[The agent] does not know whether these items were ever returned to the government upon Clinton’s departure from the State Department.”  State Department spokesman John Kirby said during an interview with "Fox & Friends" Tuesday that his understanding was that this was Clinton’s private property she had taken to the State Department.  “As I understand, those were her personal belongings she brought from home to decorate her offices and then took them back again,” Kirby said.  When asked by FoxNews.com, a spokesman for the Clinton campaign also pointed to a similar statement by a State Department spokesman and declared the claim “debunked.”  The claim, however disputed, has echoes of a similar controversy that dogged the Clintons when they left the White House in 2001 and took $190,000 worth of gifts with them. Some who gave the gifts said they were intended for the White House, including $28,000 of gifts given to the National Park Service for the White House’s personal collection, according to The Washington Post.  The flap eventually led to the Clintons returning $28,000 in gifts and paying for $86,000 of gifts themselves, according to an ABC News report at the time. A House panel would go on to investigate the presidential gift system and call for reforms to it in wake of the controversy.  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
While many analysts dismiss Donald Trump’s chances of winning over black voters, the Republican nominee has an unlikely ally making his case -- the founder of a group that once rallied black voters for Bernie Sanders.  Bruce Carter, who led "Black Men for Bernie," told FoxNews.com he had a change of heart after he traveled to urban communities and saw the levels of poverty in Democrat-controlled areas of the country.  “Once I got involved, I realized that the Democratic Party was operating as if they own the country, and that was a major turn off for me,” Carter said. “I didn’t want to represent a party that saw its people in that way.”  Carter, from Texas, has since formed “Trump for Urban Communities” – a grassroots organization he says is reaching out to black voters in big cities from Jacksonville, Fla., to Philadelphia, to Charlotte, N.C., seeking to convince first-time voters, working families and others to vote Republican in November.  “Donald Trump is the best presidential candidate, who I believe has the experience and the wherewithal to give urban communities economic and educational opportunities,” he said.  The task is a steep climb for Republicans. President Obama won 90 percent of the black vote in 2008 and 2012, and Hillary Clinton likewise is expected to sweep among the same group. Expectations among some analysts that black voters might abandon her in the primaries in favor of Sanders did not materialize -- her so-called "firewall" held.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Trump nevertheless has tried to make inroads, promising jobs, attacking Hillary Clinton for once referring to some young black criminals as “superpredators” and asking voters: “What do you have to lose?”  Even this outreach has been peppered with controversy. In the first presidential debate, he took heat for saying African-Americans and Hispanics are “living in hell.” Meanwhile, critics say his call for the return of controversial stop-and-frisk policies are also hurting his outreach to black voters who believe such policies disproportionately target them.  President Obama on Friday also mocked Trump's overall attempt to cast himself as a "populist." Noting Trump's billionaire status, Obama repeatedly said at a rally in Cleveland, "Come on, man."  Carter said while Trump's law-and-order rhetoric doesn't exactly help Trump in that area, he suggested the backlash may be exaggerated. Further, he said the Clintons are not as popular as they're made out to be.  However, Carter said Republicans need to do better, get on the ground and talk to people in those communities – something he says the Trump campaign, and Republicans in general, have been woeful at doing, and something he says "Trump for Urban Communities" is doing right now.  "I talk about poverty, unemployment rates and then I show them who they’ve been voting for, and I give them history," he said.  He says much of it depends on Republican willingness to engage directly in those communtiies.  “To use Donald Trump’s language -- What do the Republicans have to lose by investing in urban communities?”  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
The Trump campaign called Wednesday for Hillary Clinton to fire top advisers over emails, published by WikiLeaks, that appeared to mock politically conservative Catholics and push for a “Catholic Spring” from within.  Jennifer Palmieri, now the Clinton campaign’s director of communications, said in a 2011 email exchange that some politically conservative Catholics "think [Catholicism] is the most socially acceptable politically conservative religion. Their rich friends wouldn't understand if they became evangelicals."  Palmieri was responding to a message from John Halpin, a fellow at the liberal think tank Center for American Progress. Halpin remarked on a magazine article that discussed how both 21st Century Fox CEO Rupert Murdoch and "Robert Thompson, managing editor of the [Wall Street Journal], are raising their kids Catholic."  "Friggin' Murdoch baptized his kids in Jordan where John the Baptist baptized Jesus," Halpin said, before dismissing Catholic beliefs on gender as “backwards.”  "It's an amazing bastardization of the faith," Halpin added. "They must be attracted to the systematic thought and severely backwards gender relations and must be totally unaware of Christian democracy."  The exchange was included in a batch of hacked emails purportedly from Clinton Campaign Chairman John Podesta's account that were posted by WikiLeaks. Podesta was copied on the exchange between Palmieri and Halpin, but did not comment.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., described the comments as "staggering."  "To disparage the Catholic Church as ‘severely backwards’ is an insult to millions of people across the nation," Ryan, who is Catholic, said in a statement. "If anything, these statements reveal the Clinton campaign's hostile attitude toward people of faith in general.  "All Americans of faith should take a long, hard look at this and decide if these are the values we want to be represented in our next president," Ryan added. "If Hillary Clinton continues to employ people with biased and bigoted views, it's clear where her priorities lie."  Trump Campaign Manager Kellyanne Conway blasted the remarks in a conference call Wednesday, saying they show the campaign’s disdain for Catholics.  “For 30 years Hillary Clinton has been openly hostile to practicing Catholics,” she said, citing Clinton’s support of partial birth abortion and the ObamaCare contraception mandate. “Now her staff is caught calling Catholics ‘backwards’ in emails seething with disdain.”  Conway called for Clinton to fire those on her staff who have expressed anti-Catholic sentiments.  “Everyone involved should be ashamed. The hostility to religious liberty and disdain for Catholics should not go unpunished,” she said. “We call on Hillary Clinton to apologize and fire the staff involved in this anti-Catholic bigotry.”  Trump, who himself was involved in a feud with Pope Francis over his immigration policies in February, also commented on the emails to a Florida crowd, saying they show members of Clinton team “viciously attacking Catholics and evangelicals.”  Latest faux controversy out of @Wikileaks hack: Accusing Jen Palmieri, who is Catholic, of being anti-Catholic. — Brian Fallon (@brianefallon) October 12, 2016  “It won’t be tolerated by the voters,” he added.  Palmieri responded to the controversy by noting that she is Catholic and telling reporters, “The Russians orchestrated this hack.”  Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon dismissed what he called the “faux controversy,” also citing Palmieri's faith.  In a separate 2012 exchange, Podesta was involved in a conversation in which he appears to approve of the idea of fomenting a so-called “Catholic spring.”  In an email to Podesta, Sandy Newman of the liberal nonprofit Voices for Progress says there “needs to be a Catholic Spring, in which Catholics themselves demand the end of a middle ages dictatorship and the beginning of a little democracy and respect for gender equality in the Catholic church.”  “I have not thought at all about how one would 'plant the seeds of the revolution,' or who would plant them,” he muses.  Podesta tells him they are creating groups to work for such a goal:  “We created Catholics in Alliance for the Common Good to organize for a moment like this. But I think it lacks the leadership to do so now. Likewise Catholics United. Like most Spring movements, I think this one will have to be bottom up,” he says.  Angela Flood, a member of Trump’s Catholic Advisory Group and former spokeswoman for the Archdiocese of Washington, said that the email showed an attempt to undermine the Catholic faith.  “Catholics in Alliance for the Common Good and other organizations are financed by George Soros and have goals inconsistent with Catholic thinking,” she said during the conference call, in response to a question from FoxNews.com. “They see this as an opportunity to infiltrate the Church and cause chaos and confusion. It is an attempt to undermine the faith.”  Rupert Murdoch is currently the executive chairman of Fox News, which includes FoxNews.com.  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
Organizers of a pro-Trump art show tied to right-wing provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos and set to launch in Brooklyn on Saturday are scrambling to find a new gallery after organizers say the original venue caved under threats from anti-Trump activists.  The exhibit is called #DaddyWillSaveUs – a reference to a trend among some gay Trump supporters to refer to the Republican nominee as “Daddy.” It is gay conservative artist Lucian Wintrich’s follow-up to his previous art show “Twinks4Trump” which was on display during the Republican convention in July and featured gay young men wearing Trump paraphernalia. “Twink” is a term in the gay community that refers to boyish, mostly hairless, young gay men.  Like Twinks4Trump, #DaddyWillSaveUs will include gay artwork, but this time will also feature work from conservative artists in general. The show will also feature exhibits from Yiannopoulos, Vice co-founder Gavin McInnes and former pharmaceutical executive Martin Shkreli.  Wintrich told FoxNews.com that he is building on the success of Twinks4Trump, which he created as a way to challenge both the religious right, and the progressive left. He said that while he was surprised by the warm reception he got from the religious right, the reaction from those on the left was very different.  “The evangelicals were fine,” he told FoxNews.com. “But people on the left threatened to beat me up. It was amazing, the vitriol is completely incomparable.”  Wintrich said that in the build up to #DaddyWillSaveUs, he has received more threats of violence and death threats. He sent FoxNews.com screenshots he had obtained of a private Facebook invitation being circulated by a group called “Queer Love Against Trump’s Hate” that called for people to “stop or interrupt” the event and shame the gallery.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  “F***k Trump! F***k self-hating homos” a posting on the group says.  Amid the warnings, the gallery where the art would be shown canceled on Wednesday, just three days before the event. Wintrich said the owner of the gallery told him he had received emails from 50 artists saying it would ruin his reputation and they would never show their art there again if he goes ahead with it.  However, the art gallery -- Pierogi's 'The Boiler' -- told FoxNews.com that the event was not canceled due to outside pressure, but because the organizer did not provide certification of insurance and because he fundamentally misrepresented the nature of the event. The gallery also clarified that they were never hosting the event, but merely renting the space.  Gallery co-owner Joe Amrhein told artnet News that he had been under the impression the exhibit was not pro-Trump, but a piece of satire.  “Our understanding of it, up to this point, is as a satirical, Andy Kaufman-esque project by the comedian/artist,” he wrote. “This is not something that we would have shown as part of the gallery program and did not intend to support it.”  After first saying that any money made would be given to the Hillary Clinton campaign, in what Amrhein reportedly called “a hopefully fitting irony for this narcissist a**hole,” Amrhein later said the event would not be held at The Boiler. Wintrich says this move, of which he was informed Wednesday, violates their lease and that he is considering legal action.  Wintrich, as well as Yiannopoulos and McInnes, say the show must go on and are seeking an alternate venue. McInnes declared on Twitter “this is war.”  SJWs shut down our art show in the name of "love." This is war. pic.twitter.com/tKXFBlcp8m — Gavin McInnes (@Gavin_McInnes) October 6, 2016  Yiannopoulos told FoxNews.com that while some of the art will be satirical and outrageous – his performance art will feature a clawfoot bathtub and gallons of blood – the show was ultimately a real art show with serious artists displaying their work, and he said the opposition to the show is an example of the left’s hypocrisy.  “Art has always been political and no-one complains when artists take extremely left-wing positions through their art and say extremely outrageous things,” Yiannopoulos said. “But the moment conservatives do this, everyone goes nuts – it’s hypocrisy of the highest order.”  Related Image Expand / Contract This photograph shows Breitbart journalist Milo Yiannopoulos. (Lucian Wintrich)  He said the campaign from the left has been well organized and efficient, but that it has been anticipated, and Yiannopoulos says that they won’t succeed in shutting it down. But he says that the assault from the LGBT activists and the political left is only hurting their cause.  “It’s a horrible climbdown for the left,” he said. “It’s an art show and they can’t handle it because a couple of cute gay boys will be wearing ‘Make America Great Again’ hats.”  Wintrich was planning to offer 30 percent of the proceedings from an auction at the event to the American Military Partners Association, a support network for families of LGBTQ veterans. However, when contacted by a Mic.com journalist, AMPA said they would not accept the money.  The controversy over the Trump art show speaks to the sharp divide in the LGBTQ community over those backing Trump.. In September, ‘Out’ magazine faced an enormous backlash after profiling Yiannopoulos in its magazine.  On Wednesday, JamesMichael Nichols, the deputy editor of Huffington Post’s “Queer Voices” took aim at what he described as “homonationalists.”  “The aforementioned actions displayed by these various gay men that have come out in support of Trump are, in a word, deplorable,” he wrote. “These Trump-supporting homonationalists articulate not only a disregard for those who navigate the world at the intersection of a multitude of marginalized identities, but a capitalistic self-centeredness and self-interest above all else.”  Wintrich said that the attacks he is seeing is exactly why the show is called #DaddyWillSaveUs:  “[Trump] is going to save us from radical Islam and the progressive left,” he said. “The show is absolutely going to happen.”  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
The Republican National Committee is launching a fresh online push to sign up new voters and boost turnout for the November election, in the party's latest bid to preserve its majority in Congress -- and tilt the balance in what has become an increasingly tight presidential race.  The RNC launched Vote.gop earlier this month, calling it a one-stop shop for driving up voter turnout across the U.S., and particularly in swing states. The site allows visitors to register to vote, request an absentee ballot, or commit to vote.  Visitors who participate give their information, allowing the RNC to follow up with via text, phone or email to make sure they have mailed in forms and remind them to get out to vote on Nov. 8.  While Republicans generally have been outpaced by Democrats in the digital realm in past presidential elections, officials say this tool can give them an edge.  "This is a one-stop shop," a senior RNC official said. "Whereas the Democrats redirect you to a state’s website, Vote.gop has all of the information in one place which allows us to take advantage of the instant feedback, track individual steps and create universes to drive follow-up action."  The RNC has launched an eight-figure ad campaign to drive voters to the site. It marks a stark contrast from recent election cycles, where the RNC did not invest in voter registration at all.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Officials told FoxNews.com that while the project was in conjunction with the Donald Trump campaign, it is a party-wide effort and designed to help Republicans down the ticket.  “This is a tool for the entire ticket and will really help us drive turnout,” the RNC official said.  Since the site launched on Sept. 10, the party reports 50,000 people have completed the first phase of the form that allows the RNC to follow up with them. Officials say they have identified more than 300,000 people who donated to Trump but weren’t yet registered to vote.  The move is evidence the party is also getting serious about their digital strategy in general, something sorely lacking in the 2012 campaign and widely seen as a factor in Mitt Romney’s defeat to President Obama.  In 2012, the Republicans started the cycle with $20 million in debt, and no digital team. When Romney became the nominee, the digital team had six people on board. Today, officials say there are over 100 on staff, including those from the Trump campaign.  “Digital is crucial to reaching the voters you want to reach and turning them out,” another senior RNC official said. “We are definitely closing the gap on [the Democrats].”  The turnout push has been emphasized by both candidates for weeks. On Thursday, Hillary Clinton traveled to Iowa in order to encourage voters to participate in early voting in the battleground state and replicate the success President Obama had there in 2008 and 2012.  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
A pair of black cowboy boots emblazoned with the presidential seal and several rare works of art were among the first pieces of Ronald Reagan memorabilia to sell Wednesday as treasured items from the former first family's personal collection went up for auction in New York.  The highly sought-after items -- several of which went for well above their estimated value -- were put on the auction block inside a small room before a hushed crowd of eager bidders at Christie's in midtown Manhattan.  Related Image Expand / Contract On left, President Ronald Reagan and first lady Nancy Reagan, and on right, a diamond, sapphire and ruby ring belonging to Mrs. Reagan. (Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation/Christie's)  In total, 700 lots are being offered at the in-person auction that continues into Thursday, as well as online.  Items ranging from Nancy Reagan’s jewels to a signed fragment of the Berlin Wall (estimated to sell between $10,000 and 20,000) were set to go to auction. Books, mementos and fine art from the White House and from Ronald Reagan’s home in Los Angeles were also available for bidding.  The auction was hoped to bring in over $2 million for the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation and Institute, and initial sales looked promising, with many of the lots going for well above their estimates.  The pair of cowboy boots belonging to Reagan and stamped with the presidential seal went for an eye-watering $199,500, despite estimates they were worth between $10,000 and $20,000.  Related Image Expand / Contract An NFL football signed by President Ronald Reagan (Christie's)  Earlier in the day, a small bronze statue of President Reagan on horseback was estimated to be worth $2,000-$3,000 -- and went for more than $14,000. An oil painting owned by the Reagans was estimated at between $15,000-20,000 and sold for $93,750.  Other articles of interest include a series of personal doodles by President Reagan on White House stationery (estimated between $2,500 and $3,500) and an official NFL football signed and inscribed “Win One For the Gipper, Ronald Reagan” -- valued at between $5,000 and $10,000 -- which went for $93,750.  Related Image Expand / Contract Sept. 21, 2016: President of Christie's America Brook Hazelton conducts an auction for the Reagans' private collection. (Adam Shaw/FoxNews.com)  Brook Hazelton, president of Christie's, America, introduced the auction and stepped into the role of auctioneer, teasing out more bids from collectors and enthusiasts whenever possible.  “One last chance,” he joked as a bidder considered raising his bid for one lot. “It’s all for a good cause.”  Hazelton had a lot of work on his hands, with bids being called out not only in the hall, but also via the web and by phone, as Christie’s staff called out phone bids from around the world. Bids came from China, the U.K. and Japan, among other countries.  A simultaneous online component to the auction will be ongoing until Sept. 27.  FoxNews.com’s Molly Dodd contributed to this report.  Adam Shaw is a Politics Reporter and occasional Opinion writer for FoxNews.com. He can be reached here or on Twitter: @AdamShawNY.
EXCLUSIVE: Two State Department contractors, with decades of experience protecting the United States' most sensitive secrets, are speaking out for the first time about Hillary Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state and how the rules for government security clearance holders did not seem to apply to Clinton and her team.  “The State Department was her oyster and it was great for the [Clinton] foundation and great for the Clintons to be able to have such a great position," Dave Whitnah told Fox News.  Whitnah said he worked within the State Department's Office of Security Technology which is responsible for cameras and alarms and sweeping for bugs. Whitnah said everyone understood the secretary of state is the primary target of foreign intelligence services.  “The number one person would be the secretary of state and their communications," Whitnah explained. "You can think of the Iran negotiations, nuclear negotiation, negotiations with Russia, talks with Russia. You know, anything to do with foreign policy."  Whitnah emphasized that tens of millions of dollars were spent on technical security for Clinton that apparently was disregarded as her team traveled around the world on official U.S. government business.  "It was unfathomable that [her BlackBerry] would be used for anything other than just unclassified communication," Whitnah said. Clinton’s devices were not certified as secure by the State Department. As for her use of a non-secure BlackBerry, Whitnah stressed that email can be intercepted and, “Even if turned off, it’s still a listening device so that’s why you take out the batteries.”  As Clinton was sworn in as secretary in January 2009, government contractor Amel Smith said he was also working at the department and: "State Department rules are clear. I helped write those rules."  Smith says his 30 years of experience includes serving in the U.S. Army's 82nd Airborne, before becoming a counter-intelligence and counter-espionage investigator at State tracking down breaches of classified materials. He reviewed some of the FBI witness interviews from the Clinton email investigation with Fox News, and questioned those who claimed not to have the proper training in handling sensitive information.  "I hear things like, well, I forgot, um, I don't know that I was trained, I don't know this. You know -- every single person that had access to that information when it was sent is in violation," Smith emphasized.  The FBI witness interviews also show secure facilities for classified information -- known as SCIFs -- were specially built for Clinton in her in Washington, D.C., and Chappaqua, N.Y., homes. Doors that were supposed to be locked were left open.  "If you've got an uncleared person in there, it's automatically a compromise," Smith said.  Another FBI interview summary said there were personally owned desktop computers in the secure facilities at Clinton's homes, yet she told the FBI that she did not have a computer of any kind in these facilities.  "If somebody said they're there, then they probably were there, and you know, the reason you would deny it was because you probably didn't have approval," Smith said.  Having unapproved computers in a SCIF would automatically call for a security investigation.  Asked for his reaction to Clinton's claim that nothing she sent or received was marked classified, Whitnah called that assertion a “misrepresentation.” Fox News was first to report in June that at least one of the emails contained a classified information portion marking for "c" which is confidential. FBI Director James Comey later said in July when he recommended against criminal charges that a handful of Clinton emails contained classified markings.  But more than 2,100 emails with classified information, and at least 22 at the “top secret” level, passed through Clinton's unsecured private server. Asked how it happened, Smith said, "Personally, there had to have been somebody moving classified information from C-LAN, C-LAN again is Secret, Confidential only, and JWICS. JWICS is where all top secret information is."  After new emails were found in the Anthony Weiner sexting case belonging to his estranged wife Clinton aide Huma Abedin, the FBI reopened the Clinton email investigation. On Sunday, Comey said the emails did not change his recommendation against criminal charges because his investigators did not find intent to move classified materials outside secure government channels  "Whether it's the private email server, whether it's this private laptop. If there's classified -- one document on there -- that's classified, it's a violation. Somebody violated [the] law," Smith said. "Throw all the politics out the window, what we're talking about is the defense of this nation."  Asked about Smith and Whitnah, who filed a complaint against the State Department, a department spokesman said they were not direct hires -- adding that the head of diplomatic security told the FBI that Clinton was "very responsive to security issues."  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
A special team of analysts has been activated to sort and sift through the cache of newly discovered emails that kick-started the dormant Hillary Clinton email probe, two intelligence sources confirmed to Fox News.  The sources say the multi-agency task force was re-engaged over the weekend, with analysts working overlapping shifts covering 16 hours a day to identify new classified material.  The objective is to gain more clarity on the records recovered from ex-Rep. Anthony Weiner’s computer -- to assess if intelligence sources and methods were compromised and to inform FBI Director James Comey in case he faces more pressure for answers on the state of the investigation.  Comey’s announcement Friday that the bureau was reviewing newly discovered emails in the Clinton case – discovered during the separate sexting probe of the disgraced former congressman and estranged husband of top Clinton aide Huma Abedin – drew criticism from Clinton allies who accused him of meddling in the election.  The White House, though, has defended Comey.  His investigators are proceeding despite the controversy surrounding Friday’s announcement.  Sources told Fox News that as of Tuesday afternoon, agents were using computer software to exploit the relevant emails from Weiner's laptop. This process is being undertaken by members of the FBI's Computer Analysis and Response Team, or CART.  The program being used was developed by FBI forensic computer experts. The program knocks out duplicates from the cache and, with Sunday’s warrant, investigators will then be able to read the email content.  The first step is relatively quick.  “You can process a very large set of emails that eliminate duplicates, eliminate redundancies and really focus your attention on the documents in those emails that are new,” said former Justice Department official Thomas Dupree.  If new records are identified, a second phase kicks in during which investigators will physically review the emails, then farm them out to the intelligence agencies for final classification.  The Donald Trump campaign asserts that highly sensitive documents are on the computer.  “They have probably discovered … classified information in this 650,000,” said retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, a Trump surrogate.  The FBI is not commenting. The Justice Department sent a letter to Capitol Hill pledging every available resource to expedite the review before Election Day.  Karen Dunn, representing Abedin, told reporters that Abedin was surprised to learn her emails were on the computer.  "From the beginning, Ms. Abedin has complied fully and voluntarily with State Department and law enforcement requests, including sitting for hours-long interviews and providing her work-related and potentially work-related documents,” she said in a statement. “While the FBI has not contacted us about this, Ms. Abedin will continue to be, as she always has been, forthcoming and cooperative.”  And late Tuesday, the conservative group Judicial Watch released new Clinton emails, uncovered by the FBI in the first review, showing that in November 2010, Clinton’s unsecured server was attacked 10 times in two days. The Secret Service was informed. The FBI director said in July there was no evidence of a breach, though it could not be ruled out.  A government official also confirmed Tuesday that Comey and his boss Attorney General Loretta Lynch met for the first time since his decision to re-initiate the Clinton email investigation. The official characterized the meeting as cordial.  Fox News’ Matthew Dean contributed to this report.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
FBI Director James Comey’s decision to revisit the Hillary Clinton email-private server case was triggered by the discovery of Clinton-related emails in a separate sexting investigation involving ex-New York Democratic Rep. Anthony Weiner, a government source told Fox News on Sunday.  The source said an analysis of the metadata on Weiner’s computer has turned up “positive hits for state.gov and HRC emails,” which led Comey to revisit the FBI investigation into Clinton using a private email server system while secretary of state. A second law enforcement source confirmed the account.  Weiner is the estranged husband of top Clinton aide Huma Abedin. He resigned from Congress in 2011, after a sexting scandal.  That Clinton-related emails were on Weiner’s computer, which he purportedly shared with Abedin, was reported first by The Wall Street Journal.  The Clinton campaign since the announcement Friday of the new emails has argued that Comey has not said whose names are on the documents or emails, reportedly in the thousands to hundreds-of-thousands.  Investigators did not need to physically read the emails because the metadata identified the state.gov and Clinton accounts on the laptop device.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Comey restarted the case after being briefed by agents. He subsequently told Congress, and Capitol Hill Republicans promptly boasted that the FBI had reopened its investigation into Clinton using a private Internet server system while secretary of state.  Multiple sources now suggest that Comey knew about the existence of the Weiner laptop and the emails prior to last week.  In July, Comey wrapped up the one-year FBI investigation into Clinton using the private server, saying she was “extremely careless” and that some of the emails off the server included classified information.  However, he said investigators had not found enough evidence that Clinton had mishandled classified information to recommend criminal charges.  Fox News was also told Sunday that a subpoena for Weiner’s computer was issued in late September and that the device was made available about a week later. On Sunday, the FBI obtained a warrant to begin reviewing new emails potentially tied to the Clinton case.  Weiner purportedly is cooperating in the case that allegedly involves an underage female and has given investigators the laptop device.  The FBI NY team working on the Weiner case has a sophisticated system to detect emails because it was their focus was child pornography and issues related to the sexting case, one of the sources told Fox News.  However, the team was not authorized at the time of discovery to expand the search. Fox was also told the FBI obtained a warrant to collect evidence, as part of standard procedure.  A law enforcement source told Fox News earlier Sunday that the New York team told agents involved in the investigation into Clinton using a private server system while secretary of state: “We think we've come across some documents pertinent to your investigation."  Weiner is still married to top Clinton aide Huma Abedin, and a laptop connected to the sexting case was purportedly shared by the couple.  Comey was further compelled to review the documents based on two factors: the volume of documents and his commitment under oath to Congress to review “any new and substantial information,” the source also said.  The new probe comes 9 days before Election Day in a closely contested White House race between Clinton, the Democratic nominee, and Republican nominee Donald Trump.  Clinton has been the frontrunner for the entire campaign. But the FBI investigation and others, including several in the GOP-controlled Congress, have contributed to Americans’ eroding trust in her.  Several sources told Fox News this weekend that “thousands” to “tens-of-thousands” of new documents emerged in the sexting case.  However, it remains unclear whether any of them belong to either Clinton or Abedin, as the Clinton campaign has argued over the past few days.  “Everyone wants to have answers,” Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook told “Fox News Sunday.” “Comey should put out answers. … This letter is innuendo.”  Anonymous sources report that there is no evidence that the newly discovered emails on the computer involve Clinton.  However, if the sexting case involves a laptop used by Abedin and the new-found documents include Abedin emails related to her time at the State Department with Clinton, she faces serious consequences.  In June, Abedin said under oath in a Judicial Watch deposition that she searched through all her devices for government emails so they could be turned over to the State Department.  Abedin could be charged with perjury if she lied under oath and as a result would face up to five years in prison.  She also signed a State Department document stating that she no longer maintained classified information, as part of her official exit from the agency.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
President Obama’s high-security BlackBerry used a special process known as “whitelisting” that only allowed it to take calls and messages from pre-approved contacts, two former senior intelligence officials with knowledge of the set-up told Fox News – pointing to the detail as further proof the White House knew Hillary Clinton’s private account was used for government business.  As the administration now acknowledges, Obama and Clinton emailed each other while she was helming the State Department. If received on his BlackBerry, the “whitelisting” safeguard means Clinton and other contacts would have had to be approved as secure for data transmission – covering everything from emails to texts to phone calls. The Obama BlackBerry would have also been configured to accept the communications.  “Think of whitelisting like a bouncer in the VIP line at the party. If you are on the list you get in, if you are not, you get bounced to the pavement,” said Bob Gourley, former chief technology officer (CTO) for the DIA, and now a partner with strategic consulting and engineering firm Cognitio.  “Whitelisting happens by design. The IT professionals who whitelist devices at places like the White House only add the email addresses authorized by management. To do otherwise would be to violate policy in ways that could introduce threats to the system,” he added.  A second former intelligence official, who asked to speak on background, described the same process for the president’s BlackBerry, adding the timing is important. If clintonemail.com were “whitelisted” before March 2015, it would further undercut administration statements.  President Obama initially claimed in March 2015, when the details of Clinton’s secret server were first made public by the New York Times, that he only learned about the system from news reports, along with everyone else. Press Secretary Josh Earnest later walked that back, but maintained at the time that while Obama knew about Clinton’s email address, he was not aware of how the address and server had been set up.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  While there is a difference between a private server and email address, if the president's BlackBerry were configured to accept the Clinton address, it would have been clear to those handling the request that clintonemail.com was not a government account.  Both Gourley, and the second former intelligence official said typically these request comes from the White House Chief of Staff or a deputy, and are directed to the Secret Service and the White House Communications Agency (WHCA), which is a military unit assigned to the task.  Earnest dismissed questions Wednesday about their March 2015 statements.  "The president's explanation in March of 2015 and my explanation of what the president knew in March of 2015 hasn't changed, and the truth is this is just critics of Secretary Clinton and President Obama recycling a conspiracy theory that has already been debunked," Earnest said.  Emails hacked from Clinton Campaign Chairman John Podesta’s account and posted by anti-secrecy site WikiLeaks have provided additional details about the problems Obama’s initial statements caused in March 2015.  One of Clinton's top aides urged colleagues to "clean this up" after Obama claimed he only learned of Clinton's private email system from news reports. According to one March 7, 2015 email, Cheryl Mills challenged the president’s statement to CBS News.  "We need to clean this up - he has emails from her - they do not say state.gov," Mills wrote to Podesta just before midnight.  In emails released by the State Department earlier this year, Mills also asked Lewis Lukens, who was the executive director of the State Department’s executive secretariat, about getting one of the highly secure BlackBerrys for then-Secretary Clinton.  “so I have now read up more on POTUS bb which appears not really to be a bb but a different device) is there any solution to her being able to use encrypted bb like the nsa approved one he has in the vault, and if so, how can we get her one,” she wrote. The request was never granted.  Less than a month after Clinton became secretary of state, and the personal email domain that she would use exclusively for government business was registered, Hillary Clinton's team aggressively pursued changes to existing State Department security protocols so she could use her BlackBerry in secure facilities for classified information, according to new documents released under the Freedom of Information Act.  "Anyone who has any appreciation at all of security, you don't ask a question like that," cybersecurity analyst Morgan Wright told Fox News. "It is contempt for the system, contempt for the rules that are designed to protect the exact kind of information that was exposed through this email set up."  Current and former intelligence officials grimaced when asked by Fox News about the use of wireless communications devices, such as a BlackBerry, in a SCIF (Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility) -- emphasizing its use would defeat the purpose of the secure facility, and it is standard practice to leave all electronics outside.  A former State Department employee familiar with the Clinton request emphasized security personnel at the time thought the BlackBerry was only for unclassified material, adding their concerns would have been magnified if they had known Clinton's email account also held classified material.  "When you allow devices like this into a SCIF, you can allow the bad guys to listen in," Wright added.  FBI records show that President Obama used at least one pseudonym to exchange emails with then Secretary of State Clinton. The State Department withheld eight email chains that totaled 18 messages between the president and Clinton which remain confidential under the Presidential communications privilege.  Asked if the President’s BlackBerry was configured to accept the clintonemail.com address, a spokesperson for the Secret Service referred questions to the White House Communications Agency and the White House Military Office. Fox News is attempting to follow up with both.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
Roughly 1,000 emails between Hillary Clinton and Gen. David Petraeus were thought to be missing from the 30,000 emails provided by Clinton’s team to the State Department in December 2014, according to the newly released FBI investigative files.  Additional documents obtained through a federal lawsuit by Judicial Watch show Clinton had directed Petraeus to send her emails at her personal address, which was used for all government work during her tenure as secretary of state.  In a heavily redacted FBI interview summary from Aug. 17, 2015, a State Department employee from the Office of Information and Programs and Services (IPS), which handles Freedom of Information Act requests, discussed how Petraeus’ records apparently were not among the work-related emails provided by the former secretary's team.  "CENTCOM records shows approximately 1,000 work-related emails between Clinton's personal email and General David PETRAEUS, former Commander of CENTCOM and former Director of the CIA," said the employee, whose name is redacted, according to the summary. "Most of those 1,000 emails were not believed to be included in the 30,000 emails that IPS was reviewing. Out of the 30,000 emails, IPS only had a few emails from or related to PETRAEUS as well as a few related to Leon PANETTA, former Secretary of Defense."  The same employee reported on a January 2015 status briefing about the emails given by State Department senior official Patrick Kennedy who is now at the center of "quid pro quo" allegations – that he offered to help the FBI get more slots for agencies overseas in exchange for downgrading an email to unclassified. The FBI and State now emphasize the deal never happened.  "KENNEDY and [redacted] were each provided with two binders full of email examples of documents [redacted] believed were possibly classified. [Redacted] returned her binders to [redacted] but KENNEDY decided to keep his binders following the brief. [Redacted] was not aware of anyone in IPS or at STATE who received the rules or parameters the CLINTON team and/or WILLIAMS & Connolly used to segregate Clinton's personal and office work emails."  As previously reported by Fox News, there are still two missing “bankers boxes” of emails that cannot be accounted for by Hillary Clinton’s legal team Williams & Connolly.  Clinton later maintained during congressional testimony that her team read every email, but FBI Director James Comey later said that was not true and only broad search terms were used.  In addition, new emails obtained through an ongoing federal lawsuit by Judicial Watch show that on Jan. 10, 2009, Clinton told Petraeus -- who was then CENTCOM commander -- to use her personal address on a BlackBerry account. "If there is ever anything you need or want me to know, pls use this personal email address. All the best, Hillary," she wrote.  One of the most intriguing and highly redacted documents released by the FBI is a witness interview with a CIA agent on June 10, 2016. The names of the FBI agents and the CIA agent and attorney are all redacted, but it is clear they were reviewing “Top Secret” emails too damaging to national security to release under any circumstances.  According to page 66, “After reviewing the email, [redacted] exclaimed [redacted] is an idiot. [redacted] further explained he believed the email was problematic.” The CIA was apparently referring to the writer of the email, adding "[redacted] expressed his opinion that DoS was not very careful."  Fox News estimates at least 95 percent of the CIA agent’s three-page interview was blacked out. “[redacted] did not have any direct knowledge of DoS officials using unclassified or ‘barely classified’ channels [redacted] but he suspected it," the document says. The CIA statement concluded as follows: “[redacted] expressed his opinion that DoS (Department of State) was not very careful [redacted].”  The CIA used the B(1) FOIA redaction 20 times. According to Freedom of Information Act exemptions, these redactions can include information about national defense, foreign policy, U.S. national security, transnational terrorism and sources or methods, or cryptology.  B(3) was used 25 times. This FOIA category redaction category prevents disclosure by statute which includes information about arms export control, immigration and Iran.  B(7) was cited for redactions three times. This FOIA category includes protected information about investigation techniques and personal privacy.  It is of note that this CIA agent was interviewed on June 10, just three weeks before Comey held his controversial press conference declaring that Clinton was not criminal but “extremely careless” in her handling of classified materials which included SAP content known as Special Access Programs or ‘above top secret.’  State Department Spokesperson John Kirby told Fox News:  “We can’t speculate about records that DOD may have. Nor can we verify the veracity of rumors. We can only speak to the records in our possession. As we disclosed last September, the State Department received from the Department of Defense and the State Inspector General several copies of a single email chain between former Secretary Clinton and then-Commander of US Central Command David Petraeus which were not previously in the possession of the Department. These emails are now in our possession and will be subject to Freedom of Information Act requests. Beyond that, our focus is on processing the material turned over by the FBI to comply with FOIA requests.”  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
The email at the heart of a "quid pro quo" controversy involving a senior State Department executive and the FBI contained intelligence about suspects in the 2012 Benghazi terrorist attack, two government sources told Fox News.  Heavily redacted FBI interview summaries, known as 302s, state that Patrick Kennedy, a top lieutenant to Hillary Clinton when she was secretary of state, wanted to deep-six the email – which was one of two on her personal server that kick-started the FBI investigation into the mishandling of classified information on her unsecured system.  The Nov. 18, 2012 email sent to then-Secretary Clinton by aide Jake Sullivan contains the subject line "Fw:FYI - Report of arrests -- possible Benghazi connection."  It contains “B1” redactions for classified information and “B1.4D” redactions for "Foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States, including confidential sources" -- as well as “B7” redactions covering "law enforcement" activities.  The FBI files say Kennedy offered a “quid pro quo” – allowing the FBI more agents in countries where they’re forbidden, in exchange for changing the email’s “SECRET” classification. According to the documents, Kennedy wanted the record declassified and marked with a code that would shield it from public scrutiny.  The State Department confirmed Kennedy was discussing the Benghazi email in question. The FBI did not immediately respond to a request for comment.  Republican lawmakers believe Kennedy was going to the mat over the Benghazi email in an effort to kill the FBI investigation.  "It demands deep investigation. It's going to take months to try to untangle this. But when you have the FBI themselves say that there was a quid pro quo negotiation that was going on to manipulate the classification of documents, that goes to the highest degree," House Oversight Committee Chairman Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, said this week. "And that's why I feel so strongly that Patrick Kennedy should immediately be relieved of his position."  Fox News first reported in August 2015 that the Sullivan email -- along with a record from Clinton aide Huma Abedin -- both containing classified information were the catalysts for the FBI probe. The records were identified in nearly 300 Benghazi emails provided to Congress. The Intelligence Community inspector general referred the matter to the bureau due to the classified intelligence from multiple agencies including the CIA, Defense Intelligence Agency and FBI.  The FBI interview summary with a senior official at the bureau's records management division in Winchester, Va., says he was contacted by the agent working with Kennedy.  "[Redacted] indicated he had been contacted by PATRICK KENNEDY, Undersecretary of State, who had asked his assistance in altering the email's classification in exchange for a 'quid pro quo,'" the 302 states. "[Redacted] advised that in exchange for marking the email unclassified, STATE would reciprocate by allowing the FBI to place more Agents in countries where they are presently forbidden."  A second summary states Kennedy wanted an obscure B9 code applied to the email, allowing Kennedy to "archive the document in the basement of DoS (Department of State) never to be seen again." B9 is an exemption for "geological and geophysical information and data."  In a written statement Wednesday, the State Department questioned the competency of FBI investigators and the accuracy of the interview summaries that report Kennedy wanted a backroom deal on the record.  "Speaking to what actually did occur -- Under Secretary Kennedy sought to understand the FBI's process for withholding certain information from public release. Reference to a b9 exemption is mistaken," the State Department spokesperson said. "Under Secretary Kennedy explained that State's preference would be to use a b7 law enforcement redaction. In any case, the document still would have been released on our FOIA website."  In a written statement, Kennedy also denied “bargaining.”  But seasoned national security defense attorneys said an FBI 302 is a document of record.  "An FBI 302 does not contain opinion work by the FBI," defense lawyer Edward MacMahon Jr. said. "If somebody said that somebody offered me for something else, and that's in a 302, that agent is going to say I’m sure that that's exactly what happened."  Pressing for changes to the email classification after a congressional subpoena and preservation order were issued in March 2015 would have the effect of changing evidence, according to Republicans pursuing the matter.  "The FBI thought this information was not relevant and that is just stunning to me because this is some of the most unbelievable set of documents that we've seen to date," Chaffetz said. "It really goes to the core of why we're so concerned.”  State Department spokesman John Kirby said in a statement that while redactions are made to protect exempt information from public release, “That does not affect whether a document has been preserved for purposes of a congressional subpoena.”  The FBI and State Department both emphasize that no "quid pro quo" took place. The email classification was not changed in the end, and no additional FBI agents were assigned overseas.  In a Washington Post interview Tuesday, the now-retired FBI agent who dealt with Kennedy confirmed they discussed doing a favor for one another, but when the agent discovered a classified Benghazi email was involved, he turned Kennedy down.  But one of the FBI agent's colleagues told investigators the agent in fact pressured him to change the email to unclassified, and relayed the conversation with Kennedy as a quid pro quo. The retired agent disputes that description.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
FBI interview summaries and notes, provided late Friday to the House Government Oversight and Intelligence Committees, contain allegations of a "quid pro quo" between a senior State Department executive and FBI agents during the Hillary Clinton email investigation, two congressional sources told Fox News.  "This is a flashing red light of potential criminality," Republican Rep. Jason Chaffetz of Utah, who has been briefed on the FBI interviews, told Fox News.  He said "there was an alleged quid pro quo” involving Undersecretary for Management Patrick Kennedy and the FBI “over at least one classified email.”  Related Image Expand / Contract AP (Congressman Jason Chaffetz (R-UT))  “In return for altering the classification, the possibility of additional slots for the FBI at missions overseas was discussed,” Chaffetz said.  As Fox News previously reported, interviews released earlier this month, known as 302s, reveal the serious allegation that Kennedy applied pressure to subordinates to change classified email codes so they would be shielded from Congress and the public. Fox News was told as far back as August 2015 that Kennedy was running interference on Capitol Hill. But Kennedy, in his FBI interview on Dec. 21, 2015, “categorically rejected” allegations of classified code tampering.  Chaffetz has not read the new documents, which include classified records that must be read in a security facility. But based on a briefing from staffers, Chaffetz said there are grounds for at least "four hearings" after the recess. Chaffetz, who is currently out of town campaigning, said allegations came from witnesses though there is some conflict in the record.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  "Both myself and Chairman Devin Nunes of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence are infuriated by what we have heard," he added.  "Left to their own devices the FBI would never have provided these [records] to Congress and waited until the last minute. This is the third batch because [the FBI] didn’t think they were relevant," Chaffetz said.  The second congressional source backed the assessment, and both added that they expect the FBI interviews will be released as early as Monday as part of ongoing FOIA requests.  A spokesperson at the FBI provided a lengthy statement to Fox Saturday night -- disputing Chaffetz's characterization and stating that, while the conversation did happen, the two issues discussed were not connected. The FBI's statement is below:  "Prior to the initiation of the FBI’s investigation of former Secretary Clinton’s personal email server, the FBI was asked to review and make classification determinations on FBI emails and information which were being produced by the State Department pursuant to FOIA. The FBI determined that one such email was classified at the Secret level. A senior State Department official requested the FBI re-review that email to determine whether it was in fact classified or whether it might be protected from release under a different FOIA exemption. A now-retired FBI official, who was not part of the subsequent Clinton investigation, told the State Department official that they would look into the matter. Having been previously unsuccessful in attempts to speak with the senior State official, during the same conversation, the FBI official asked the State Department official if they would address a pending, unaddressed FBI request for space for additional FBI employees assigned abroad. Following the call, the FBI official consulted with a senior FBI executive responsible for determining the classification of the material and determined the email was in fact appropriately classified at the Secret level. The FBI official subsequently told the senior State official that the email was appropriately classified at the Secret level and that the FBI would not change the classification of the email. The classification of the email was not changed, and it remains classified today. Although there was never a quid pro quo, these allegations were nonetheless referred to the appropriate officials for review."  The State Department provided a response Sunday but it did not directly address the alleged discussion of more overseas postings for FBI agents.  “This allegation is inaccurate and does not align with the facts,” State Department Deputy Spokesperson Mark Toner said. “To be clear: the State Department did upgrade the document at the request of the FBI when we released it back in May 2015.”  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
EXCLUSIVE: American arms dealer Marc Turi, in his first television interview since criminal charges against him were dropped, told Fox News that the Obama administration -- with the cooperation of Hillary Clinton’s State Department -- tried and failed to make him the scapegoat for a 2011 covert weapons program to arm Libyan rebels that spun out of control.  “I would say, 100 percent, I was victimized…to somehow discredit me, to throw me under the bus, to do whatever it took to protect their next presidential candidate,” he told Fox News chief intelligence correspondent Catherine Herridge.  The 48-year-old Arizona resident has been at the epicenter of a failed federal investigation led by the Justice Department spanning five years and costing the government an estimated $10 million or more, Turi says.  Turi says the Justice Department abruptly dropped the case to avoid public disclosure of the weapons program, that was designed to force the ouster of Libyan dictator Muammar Qaddafi during the 2011 Arab Spring.  "Those transcripts from current as well as former CIA officers were classified," Turi said of the evidence. "If any of these relationships [had] been revealed it would have opened up a can of worms. There wouldn't have been any good answer for the U.S. government especially in this election year." The Justice Department faced a deadline last week to produce records to the defense.  Turi says he was specifically “targeted by the Obama administration “and “lost everything--my family, my friends, my business, my reputation.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  As Fox News has reported extensively, in 2011, the Obama administration with support from some Republican and Democratic lawmakers explored options to arm the so-called “Libyan rebels” during the chaotic Arab Spring but United Nations sanctions prohibited direct sales.  Turi's plan was to have the U.S. government supply conventional weapons to the Gulf nations Qatar and UAE, which would then in turn supply them to Libya. But Turi says he never sold any weapons, and he was cut out of the plan. Working with CIA, Turi said Clinton's State Department had the lead and used its own people, with weapons flowing to Libya and Syria.  "Some (weapons) may have went out under control that we had with our personnel over there and the others went to these militia. That's how they lost control over it," Turi said. "I can assure you that these operations did take place and those weapons did go in different directions."  Asked by Fox News who got the weapons -- Al Qaeda, Ansar al-Sharia, or ISIS -- Turi said: "All of them, all of them, all of them."  Turi exchanged emails in 2011 with then U.S. envoy to the Libyan opposition Chris Stevens. A day after the exchange about Turi's State Department application to sell weapons, Clinton wrote on April 8, 2011 to aide Jake Sullivan, "fyi. the idea of using private security experts to arm the opposition should be considered."  Asked if the email exchanges are connected or a coincidence, Turi said, "When you look at this timeline, none of it was a coincidence. It was all strategically managed and it had to come from her own internal circle."  Turi also told Fox News that he believes emails sent about the weapons programs were deleted by Hillary Clinton and her team because that “it would have gone to an organization within the Bureau of Political Military affairs within the State Department known as PM/RSAT (Office of Regional Security and Arms Transfers.) That’s where you would find Jake Sullivan, Andrew Shapiro and a number of political operatives that would have been intimately involved with this foreign policy."  The four felony counts -- which included two of arms dealing in violation of the Arms Export Control Act and two of lying on his State Department weapons application -- were dismissed last week against Turi “with prejudice,” meaning the government cannot come after him again on this matter.  The Justice Department decision, weeks before the election, coupled with the now public emails, cast a new light on Clinton's 2013 Benghazi testimony where she was asked about the movement of weapons by Sen. Rand Paul.  Paul: Were any of these weapons transferred to other countries. Any countries. Turkey included?  Clinton: Well, senator you'll have to direct that question to the agency that ran the annex and I will see what information is available.  Paul: You're saying you don't know?  Clinton: I don't know.  Turi first told his story to Fox News senior executive producer Pamela Browne in 2014, and since, Turi says he's lost everything to fight the Justice Department, which had no further comment beyond the publicly available court records.  "With all the resources that they were throwing at me, I knew there would have to be some type of explanation of the operation that was going terribly wrong in Libya," Turi said. "It is completely un-American...I was a contractor for the Central Intelligence Agency."  Turi said he is grateful the case is over. "It really is ungodly, and unjust and unconscionable, that the entire force of the United States government came after me for a simple application. I was working for the U.S. government."  Turi added, "I never shipped anything. I never even received the contract. So all I received was an approval for $534 million to support our interests overseas. And it would have been the United States government that facilitated that operation from Qatar and UAE by way of allowing those countries to land their planes and land their ships in Libya."  Close friend and Turi adviser Robert Stryk described Turi this way to Fox News in a statement:  “Marc Turi is a true patriot who served his country in the fight against Islamofascist terrorists in the Middle East. His fraudulent prosecution by Hillary Clinton’s associates in the Justice Department is deplorable as is the fate of the American heroes murdered in Benghazi. Our most loyal citizens deserve better."  And Turi hinted there is more to emerge on the 2012 Benghazi attacks which killed four Americans including Stevens.  "Now there’s a flip side to this. Some of the operations that I was involved in, in another country for the agency has a linkage and there’s a backstory to the actual buy-back program of the surface to air missiles that were shipped and mysteriously disappeared out of Benghazi," Turi said. "So we can save that for another time, but the reality is a lot of this could have exposed a number of covert operations that I don’t think the American public would really want to know at this point in time.”  Fox News asked the State Department about Turi’s allegations, and whether no weapons reached extremists groups on Clinton’s watch. A spokesperson said they would check.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
Buried in the 189 pages of heavily redacted FBI witness interviews from the Hillary Clinton email investigation are details of yet another mystery -- about two missing “bankers boxes” filled with the former secretary of state’s emails.  The interviews released earlier this month, known as 302s, also reveal the serious allegation that senior State Department official Patrick Kennedy applied pressure to subordinates to change the classified email codes so they would be shielded from Congress and the public.  The details about the boxes are contained in five pages of the FBI file – with a staggering 111 redactions – that summarize the statements of a State Department witness who worked in the “Office of Information Programs and Services (IPS)." The employee told the FBI that, “Initially, IPS officials were told there were 14 bankers boxes of former Secretary of State Hillary CLINTON’s emails at CLINTON’s Friendship Heights office.” Friendship Heights is a neighborhood that straddles the Northwest neighborhood of the District of Columbia and Maryland.  The State Department witness further explained to the FBI that “on or about December 5, 2014, IPS personnel picked up only 12 bankers boxes of CLINTON’s emails from Williams & Connolly.”  The officials were not sure if the boxes “were consolidated or what could have happened to the two other boxes. “  Clinton’s chief lawyer at Williams & Connolly, who leads all Clinton-related legal matters, is David Kendall. He has successfully represented Bill and Hillary Clinton together and separately throughout decades of their legal entanglements since the 1980’s, ranging from the former president’s sex scandals to missing billing records for Hillary Clinton’s work as a partner in The Rose Law Firm on behalf of the failed Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan and Capital Management Services.  In the documents provided by Kendall’s law firm, the witness told the FBI they were “unable to locate any of her emails from January-April 2009.” This timeframe is crucial as it covers the start of Clinton’s term as secretary of state and when she set up a private server for all government business, in turn skirting public records laws.  In the same Aug. 18, 2015, interview, on page 42, the State Department witness also told the FBI there was a deliberate effort to change sensitive Clinton emails bearing the “B(1)” code -- used in the Freedom of Information Act review process to identify classified information -- to the category of “B-5.” That category covers Executive Branch deliberations, “interagency or intra-agency communications including attorney client privileges,” and makes material exempt from public release.  Over five pages of the single-spaced summary notes, the witness, whose name is redacted, alleges Clinton’s team which included Undersecretary for Management Patrick Kennedy played classification games to confuse and obfuscate the formal FOIA review process.  “(Redacted) believed there was interference with the formal FOIA review process. Specifically, STATE’s Near East Affairs Bureau upgraded several of CLINTON’s emails to a classified level with a B(1) release exemption. (Redacted) along with (redacted) attorney, Office of Legal Counsel called STATE's Near East Affairs Bureau and told them they could use a B(5) exemption on an upgraded email to protect it instead of the B(1) exemption."  In early May 2015, the witness reported, "… KENNEDY held a closed-door meeting with (redacted) and (redacted) DOJ's Office of Information Programs where KENNEDY pointedly asked (redacted) to change the FBI's classification determination regarding one of CLINTON's emails, which the FBI considered classified. The email was related to FBI counter-terrorism operations.”  This appears to be one of two emails that kick-started the FBI probe in the summer of 2015. Fox News first identified the two emails containing classified information as well as sensitive law enforcement information sent by Clinton aides Huma Abedin and Jake Sullivan to Clinton’s unsecured server.  State Department spokesman John Kirby consistently has stated the majority of the 2,100 Clinton server emails containing classified information were "retroactively classified" and not classified at the time they were sent and received. But that explanation is disputed by seasoned intelligence officials. Even the State Department witness cast doubt on the claim in the FBI interview:  "(Redacted) heard the argument that some of CLINTON'S emails were unclassified back in the 2009-2012 timeframe when they were initiated, but were later classified due to various circumstances. It was very rare for something that was actually unclassified to become classified years after the fact."  Asked this week about the FBI 302 and the claims Kennedy, one of the department's most senior executives, tampered with the FOIA review process, State Department spokesman Elizabeth Trudeau said they "strongly refute those claims."  She added, "The department has complete confidence that the … attorneys performed the highest professional and ethical standards, including, with connection, with the review and release of Secretary Clinton's emails."  Kennedy, in his FBI interview on Dec. 21, 2015, “categorically rejected” the allegations of classified code tampering. While the section is partially redacted, it appears the FBI asked Kennedy about the credibility of the accusing witness. He said she “says it like it is” and has “no fear of telling truth to power.”  The conflicting statements indicate either the junior State Department employee or Kennedy misled or lied to federal agents which can be a criminal offense.  Fox News first reported on the intelligence community’s deep concerns that the process was tampered with, as lawyers with Clinton ties were alleged to be involved at the State Department.  Fox News was told in August 2015 that Kennedy was running interference on Capitol Hill. Two sources confirmed that Kennedy went to Capitol Hill and argued one of the emails that kick-started the probe did not contain classified material, citing a 2011 Irish Times newspaper report to claim the information was already public.  According to congressional testimony, at least one of the lawyers in the office where the changes were made is Catherine “Kate” Duval, who was at the IRS during the Lois Lerner email scandal and later handled the release of documents to the Benghazi congressional committee.  Duval once worked for the same firm as Kendall and has since left the State Department.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”
The Army is taking a second look at the case of a Green Beret who was paralyzed in an accident last year and now faces the possibility of a discharge that could jeopardize his medical care, FoxNews.com has learned.  Sgt. 1st Class Timothy Brumit was paralyzed from the chest down after diving headfirst into shallow water in July 2015, attempting to rescue what he thought was a drowning girl. The Army has since determined his decision was reckless and negligent, citing his alcohol and drug use.  But after recent media and congressional attention on the case, the commander of U.S. Army Special Operations Command asked Tuesday for a review of his case. In a memo, Lt. Gen. Kenneth E. Tovo urged U.S. Army Human Resources Command to “reconsider” the determination.  “[T]here are unknown factors that likely contributed to SFC Brumit’s momentary lapse in judgment that resulted in his life-long paralysis,” he wrote. “Based on the totality of the circumstances, a review of these unknown factors warrants reconsideration.”  The Afghanistan and Iraq veteran, who has served eight combat tours, has argued that the Army “failed” him as he struggled with PTSD, traumatic brain injury and substance abuse. After the July 2015 incident, he was found to have a blood alcohol level of 0.1 percent and traces of cocaine in his system.  He doesn’t deny he was drinking. But Brumit told The Daily Beast, which reported Sunday on Brumit’s case, that he had not used drugs that day – and wasn’t “drunk” when he made the decision to jump in the water. He reportedly heard a Coast Guard alert for a missing girl and thought he saw her, so jumped in. That’s when he hit a sand bar and broke his neck, he told The Daily Beast. The missing girl apparently was later found safe.  Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Calif., who has advocated for Brumit, called the Army move to review the case a positive development that puts time on the clock for Brumit.  “The Army hates to open boxes up,” Hunter told FoxNews.com. “The fact that they kicked it back at all makes me optimistic.”  In looking into Brumit’s case and his disability benefits, the Army had conducted a “Line of Duty” probe to determine the circumstances of his injury. Their determination that he was reckless increased the likelihood he would face an other-than-honorable discharge and potentially lose benefits.  For now, those medical expenses are paid for. Brumit lives at his parents’ place in Georgia and has had seven surgeries to date. A denial of benefits could leave the family facing millions in lifetime medical costs, though some charity efforts have been launched.  Hunter told Fox News’ “Fox & Friends” the Army “needs to do the right thing and give him an honorable discharge.”  In a letter earlier this month to Hunter seeking his help, Brumit claimed the Army “failed to support my requests for treatment for my PTSD, Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), and secondary Substance Use Disorder (SUD).”  He wrote, “I acknowledge that I have struggled, I have sought help and the Army failed me in that pursuit.” He said the “vindictive” investigation has “denied me the medical care required for my current injuries.” According to The Daily Beast, he was diagnosed by the Army with “adjustment disorder” but not PTSD.  Hunter initially wrote to Secretary of the Army Eric Fanning on Sept. 9 asking for reconsideration. He also said Brumit was prevented from getting necessary treatment, saying he was even removed from drug-and-alcohol treatment by the 7th Special Forces Group to return to duty.  Tovo, in his memo, maintained that it is “unknown” whether Brumit’s substance abuse problems stem from PTSD, or whether he has PTSD, noting “his medical records do not reflect this.” He also said Brumit got “extensive” assistance, noting he participated in more than 20 medical, behavioral health and substance abuse meetings, screening and surveys.  But he said “it is undisputed” that his multiple combat tours “created stressors at home” and likely contributed to substance abuse. He acknowledged it’s possible this contributed to his “extremely poor decision” in July 2015.  “From a commander’s perspective, erring on the side of the Soldier and presuming that his headfirst dive was not an act of willful negligence adds an element of empathy to this case,” he wrote, in seeking “further review.”
For all the attention on battleground polls giving Hillary Clinton the edge, Donald Trump enjoys at least one electoral advantage in his uphill climb to the White House: Republicans are outpacing Democrats in registering new voters in key states.  A review of registration figures shows that in the swing states that sign up voters by party, Republicans are seeing a significantly bigger boost since 2012. In states like Florida and Pennsylvania, the party has added tens of thousands of voters to the rolls at a time when Democrats have seen their base shrink.  “The numbers [in those states] … are a huge shift from what we’ve seen in 2012,” Republican National Committee spokeswoman Lindsay Walters said.  The surge doesn’t change the fact that Clinton leads, if only by a thin margin, in most battleground state polls, which presumably reflect the current voter make-up.  Fox News ratings show Clinton maintains the advantage in the Electoral College, while a Washington Post survey this week of registered voters in all 50 states reflects a similar dynamic. And in big swing states ranging from Florida to North Carolina to Pennsylvania, there are still more registered Democrats than Republicans.  But the registration shift since 2012 suggests Trump will enjoy a stronger base of GOP voters in some states than did Mitt Romney four years ago.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  In Florida, numbers from the secretary of state show Republicans gained 162,000 voters since 2012; Democrats lost nearly 137,000.  In Pennsylvania, Republicans gained 40,000 voters; Democrats lost 178,000.  And in North Carolina, both parties lost members as the number of unaffiliated voters rose. But Democrats lost far more than Republicans in the last four years.  Not all states register voters by party, but a review of eight states that do – Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Iowa, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina and Pennsylvania – showed Democrats since 2012 signed up more than Republicans only in Arizona and Colorado.  Changes in registration can be driven by a range of factors: Young voters coming of age and registering; voters switching parties, voters moving from state to state; and adults registering for the first time.  An RNC official involved in registration efforts told FoxNews.com the bulk of the changes reflect new sign-ups. The official said the party has been putting more emphasis on registration “than at any time since 2004.”  Staffers are going to fairs, churches and door-to-door – and especially Trump/Pence rallies with that goal in mind.  “We’re walking away with a ton of new registrants from those [rallies],” the official said. According to the party, staff and volunteers to date have knocked on millions of doors and registered nearly 725,000 new voters.  The RNC, though, expects Democrats to step up their own registration efforts over the course of the next month as deadlines approach.  For its part, the Clinton campaign launched a major registration effort at the start of the Republican National Convention in July, setting a goal of signing up more than 3 million.  “Since the Democratic National Convention, more than 600,000 phone bank, canvass, or voter registration shifts have been completed,” a Clinton campaign official told FoxNews.com.  The official said the nominee and running mate Tim Kaine, along with other surrogates, will continue hosting voter registration events across the country. Most recently, Clinton held one Thursday in Charlotte, N.C. The campaign is planning to use upcoming events with President Obama and first lady Michelle Obama as opportunities to register more in big swing states. And ahead of the state’s Oct. 11 registration deadline, the campaign is launching what it calls a “Campus Day of Action” across Pennsylvania campuses on Saturday to register students.  “Our goal is to make sure every student has their voice heard on Election Day,” Hillary for Pennsylvania Youth Outreach Director Kyron Banks said in a statement.  The RNC also is planning a “National Day of Action” Saturday during which thousands of staff and volunteers will knock on doors in battlegrounds, with registration a major focus.  Fox News’ Steve Carlson contributed to this report.
Democratic members of the Federal Election Commission, in a decision made public on Thursday, voted last month to punish Fox News over criteria changes for the network’s first Republican presidential primary debate – but were blocked by Republican commissioners.  Commissioner Lee Goodman, one of those who voted to block the move, called the attempt “astonishing.”  “This is nothing short of censorship of news coverage, and it is wrong,” he and the two other GOP commissioners said in a statement.  The vote concerned changes made to the criteria for the Fox News-hosted GOP primary debate on Aug. 6, 2015 in Cleveland. For that debate, Fox News decided to alter the format – hosting two debates instead of one and expanding the first debate for lower-polling candidates to include any candidate identified as such in national polls. Seven candidates ultimately participated in the first debate, and 10 participated in the prime-time event.  A complaint subsequently was filed with the FEC by candidate Mark Everson – who was not in the debate – claiming those changes were tantamount to an illegal corporate contribution to the candidates on stage.  After consideration, two Democratic commissioners – Ann Ravel and Steven Walther – concluded the network had made such an illegal contribution to the seven candidates invited to the first debate and voted to penalize. The vote failed 2-4. The other Democratic commissioner, Ellen Weintraub, did not vote to penalize Fox News and voted to dismiss.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Separately, when given the chance to conclude there was “no reason” to believe Fox News violated the law, the commission split 3-3, along party lines. Because any enforcement action requires four votes, the case was closed.  Though Republican members criticized all three Democrats for their votes, Weintraub stressed in a written statement that she voted “no” when asked whether Fox News broke the law. She said the network was “confronted with a difficult and fast-moving situation, and I believe they were trying to do the right thing.”  However, in an apparent swipe at Goodman, she said efforts “exaggerating disagreement among Commissioners” are “unhelpful.”  The Republican commissioners, though, said the Democrats went too far.  While political debate rules have come before the FEC in the past, rarely has the commission come so close to penalizing a news outlet over the issue.  The commission in 2002 dismissed a complaint about debate rules that had been lodged against the Boston Globe and WBZ-TV. And years earlier, in 1980, the commission threatened an injunction against the Nashua Telegraph over a planned debate between George H.W. Bush and Ronald Reagan that excluded other candidates. Reagan then stepped in to pay the costs – and during that debate, famously said, “I am paying for this microphone.”  Until recently, the FEC had steered clear of threatening action over press-sponsored debates.  Goodman argued that such “editorial decisions” regarding debate rules should be free from FEC regulation. He suggested there is “no practical or logical difference” between hosting a debate with 17 candidates and interviewing 17 candidates.  “How could expanding debate news coverage from 10 to 17 candidates be against the law?” he said.
Democratic members of the Federal Election Commission, in a decision to be made public on Thursday, voted last month to punish Fox News over criteria changes for the network’s first Republican presidential primary debate – but were blocked by Republican commissioners.  Commissioner Lee Goodman, one of those who voted to block the move, confirmed the details of the vote to FoxNews.com.  He called the attempt to punish Fox News over the debate changes “astonishing” and described it as a move toward censorship.  “All press organizations should be concerned when the government asserts regulatory authority to punish and censor news coverage,” Goodman said in a statement.  The vote concerned changes made to the criteria for the Fox News-hosted GOP primary debate on Aug. 6, 2015 in Cleveland. For that debate, Fox News decided to alter the format – hosting two debates instead of one and expanding the first debate for lower-polling candidates to include any candidate identified as such in national polls. Seven candidates ultimately participated in the first debate, and 10 participated in the prime-time event.  A complaint subsequently was filed with the FEC claiming those changes were tantamount to an illegal corporate contribution to the candidates on stage.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  After consideration, two Democratic commissioners – Ann Ravel and Steven Walther – concluded the network had made such an illegal contribution to the seven candidates invited to the first debate and voted to penalize. The vote failed 2-4. The other Democratic commissioner, Ellen Weintraub, did not vote to penalize Fox News and voted to dismiss.  Separately, when given the chance to conclude there was “no reason” to believe Fox News violated the law, the commission split 3-3, along party lines. Because any enforcement action requires four votes, the case was closed.  While political debate rules have come before the FEC in the past, rarely has the commission come so close to penalizing a news outlet over the issue.  The commission in 2002 dismissed a complaint about debate rules that had been lodged against the Boston Globe and WBZ-TV. And years earlier, in 1980, the commission threatened an injunction against the Nashua Telegraph over a planned debate between George H.W. Bush and Ronald Reagan that excluded other candidates. Reagan then stepped in to pay the costs – and during that debate, famously said, “I am paying for this microphone.”  Until recently, the FEC had steered clear of threatening action over press-sponsored debates.  Goodman argued that such “editorial decisions” regarding debate rules should be free from FEC regulation. He suggested there is “no practical or logical difference” between hosting a debate with 17 candidates and interviewing 17 candidates.  “How could expanding debate news coverage from 10 to 17 candidates be against the law?” he said.
Newly obtained congressional data shows hundreds of terror plots have been stopped in the U.S. since 9/11 – mostly involving foreign-born suspects, including dozens of refugees.  The files are sure to inflame the debate over the Obama administration’s push to admit thousands more refugees from Syria and elsewhere, a proposal Donald Trump has vehemently opposed on the 2016 campaign trail.  “[T]hese data make clear that the United States not only lacks the ability to properly screen individuals prior to their arrival, but also that our nation has an unprecedented assimilation problem,” Sens. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., and Ted Cruz, R-Texas, told President Obama in a June 14 letter, obtained by FoxNews.com.  The files also give fresh insight into the true scope of the terror threat and cover a wide range of cases, including:  A Seattle man plotting to attack a U.S. military facility  An Atlantic City man using his “Revolution Muslim” site to encourage confrontations with U.S. Jewish leaders “at their homes”  An Iraq refugee arrested in January, accused of traveling to Syria to “take up arms” with terror groups  While the June 12 massacre at an Orlando gay nightclub marked the deadliest terror attack on U.S. soil since 2001, the data shows America has been facing a steady stream of plots. For the period September 2001 through 2014, data shows the U.S. successfully prosecuted 580 individuals for terrorism and terror-related cases. Further, since early 2014, at least 131 individuals were identified as being implicated in terror.  Across both those groups, the senators reported that at least 40 people initially admitted to the U.S. as refugees later were convicted or implicated in terror cases.  Among the 580 convicted, they said, at least 380 were foreign-born. The top countries of origin were Pakistan, Lebanon and Somalia, as well as the Palestinian territories.  Both Sessions and Cruz sit on the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration and the National Interest, which compiled the terror-case information based on data from the Justice Department, news reports and other open-source information. The files were shared with FoxNews.com.  The files include dates, states of residence, countries of origin for foreign-born suspects, and reams of other details.  Specifically, they show a sharp spike in cases in 2015, largely stemming from the arrest of suspects claiming allegiance to the Islamic State. They also show a heavy concentration of cases involving suspects from California, Texas, New York and Minnesota, among other states.  EXPLORE THE DATA IN THE MAPS AND CHARTS BELOW  The senators say the terror-case repository still is missing critical details on suspects’ immigration history, which they say the Department of Homeland Security has “failed to provide.” Immigration data the senators compiled came from other sources.  Sessions and Cruz asked the president in their letter to order the departments of Justice, Homeland Security and State to "update" and provide more detailed information. The senators have sent several letters to those departments since last year requesting immigration histories of those tied to terror.  “The administration refuses to give out the information necessary to establish a sound policy that protects Americans from terrorists,” Sessions said in a statement to Fox News.  Asked about the complaints, DHS spokeswoman Gillian M. Christensen told FoxNews.com the department “will respond to the senators’ request directly and not through the press.”  “More than 100 Congressional committees, subcommittees, caucuses, commissions and groups exercise oversight and ensure accountability of DHS and we work closely with them on a daily basis. We’ve received unprecedented requests from a number of senators and representatives for physical paper files for more than 700 aliens,” she said, adding that officials have to review each page manually for privacy and other issues.  Cruz ran unsuccessfully this year for the Republican presidential nomination. Sessions, an ardent critic of the administration’s immigration policies, is supporting presumptive GOP nominee Trump.  The allegations detailed in the subcommittee’s research pertain to a range of cases, involving suspects caught traveling or trying to travel overseas to fight, as well as suspects ensnared in controversial sting operations which civil-liberties groups including the ACLU have criticized.  In a 2014 report, Human Rights Watch said nearly half of the federal counterterror convictions at the time came from “informant-based cases,” many of them sting operations where the informants played a role in the plot.  The report said: “In some cases the Federal Bureau of Investigation may have created terrorists out of law-abiding individuals by conducting sting operations that facilitated or invented the target’s willingness to act.”  But even in some of those cases, federal agents got involved after learning of a serious suspected plot. In the case of the Seattle suspect, Abu Khalid Abdul-Latif, authorities said he approached someone in 2011 about attacking a military installation. That citizen alerted law enforcement and worked with them to capture Latif and an accomplice.  FoxNews.com’s Liz Torrey contributed to this report.
An Afghan national with ties to the Taliban — and a plot to carry out a terror attack somewhere in North America — was caught last fall after being smuggled into the U.S. from Mexico, an incident sure to further inflame the debate over national security risks at the border.  The Afghan national’s alleged terror ties were not initially flagged in a terror database – and as a result, not initially reported – when the incident first came to light last November, according to Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Calif., who obtained Homeland Security documents on the incident. It was only later that U.S. officials discovered his associations.  Hunter told Fox News on Friday that the database disconnect represents a “monumental failure.”  “We don’t know who’s coming into the U.S. and what they’re bringing with them,” he told Fox News’ “America’s Newsroom.” “It is as bad as it seems.”  The new details were first reported by The Washington Times.  According to information shared with FoxNews.com by Hunter’s office, the Afghan in question was picked up and detained by U.S. Border Patrol agents about 15 miles inside Arizona from the border. He was arrested along with five Pakistani citizens and two Mexicans identified as smugglers.  The Afghan claimed he crossed into the U.S. on Nov. 13, 2015 by crawling under a border fence near Nogales, Ariz. But an initial check in one of the terror databases apparently did not flag him.  As a result, all six illegal immigrants – from what are known as “special interest” countries – were cleared by the National Targeting Center.  According to a letter sent Wednesday from Hunter to Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson, all six were initially served with an “Expedited Removal.” The Afghan national “sought U.S. immigration benefits, and was processed as having credible fear after he stated his life was in danger,” Hunter wrote.  However, according to the letter, the individual was in fact identified in a separate database, the Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment (TIDE), as having terror ties.  Hunter wrote that the individual was said to be “involved in a plot to conduct an attack in the U.S. and/or Canada and has family ties to members of the Taliban.”  For an unknown reason, the individual was not initially watch-listed in the separate Terrorist Screening Database, according to the letter – and so these associations were not initially noticed.  Officials apparently noticed the error in time, as the individual remains in U.S. custody in Arizona.  But Hunter said in his letter to Johnson that his understanding is the whereabouts of the other men arrested that day “is unknown.” Hunter asked DHS for additional details.  Hunter also pushed back Friday on the notion that the incident could represent a success since the Afghan national was ultimately apprehended and later flagged.  “You can assume that others have gotten through,” Hunter told Fox News.  The information shared with FoxNews.com showed at least a dozen illegal immigrants from Afghanistan and Pakistan have either made it across the U.S. border or gotten close, dating back to 2014.  The Washington Times reported that the incident last fall involved a Brazilian-based smuggling network.  The Afghan national in question apparently took a complicated route, essentially around the world and then through Latin America, to arrive in Arizona. He told officials he left Afghanistan in 2015 and then traveled from Dubai to Brazil. From there, he moved up through Peru and other South American countries before traveling through Central America.  In August 2015, he was apprehended in Panama but was released when “no derogatory information” on him was found. He continued his journey, crossing into the U.S. in November before being detected, along with his group, by Border Patrol.  The apprehensions were reported at the time.  However, the local reports, based on comments from border officials, also said no “derogatory information” turned up when their names were run through security databases.  “The American people would have had no clue on this if we didn’t get these documents from Homeland Security,” Hunter said Friday.  Reached for comment, a DHS spokesperson said:‎ "Department of Homeland Security agencies and our partners are consistently targeting, through a sustained and unified effort, human smuggling networks. However, as a matter of policy, we do not confirm details in ongoing criminal investigations or law enforcement operations.‎"  FoxNews.com's Jennifer Hickey contributed to this report.
A Capitol Hill push to reinstate a Green Beret discharged after confronting an Afghan boy’s accused rapist has garnered high-profile celebrity support – from actor Harvey Keitel, just days before an expected decision on the case.  The star of such films as “Mean Streets” and “Reservoir Dogs” reached out to the office of Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Calif., one of Sgt. 1st Class Charles Martland’s most vocal advocates, to go on the record in support of the Green Beret.  A former Marine himself, Keitel said Martland and his team leader deserve a medal – not punishment – for their actions.  “[W]hen I was a young Marine I understood we were present in order to help others who did not have the wherewithal to protect themselves,” Keitel wrote, in an email to Hunter chief of staff Joe Kasper. “Whomever owns the idea that decided to reprimand these two men instead of giving them a medal for their actions should be asked what the hell they would’ve done if it was their child in question …”  The email was shared with FoxNews.com. Kasper said he also spoke by phone with Keitel who affirmed his support.  After a recent delay in consideration of the case, a decision on Martland’s fate is now expected by May 1.  Martland, an 11-year Special Forces veteran, was stationed in Afghanistan in 2011 when he and team leader Capt. Daniel Quinn confronted – and, according to accounts of the incident, body-slammed – a local police commander who allegedly had raped a 12-year-old boy.  Martland has said he and Quinn confronted the commander after confirming the allegations with village elders and others. He claims Quinn got a "first-hand confession" but the confrontation turned physical after the commander laughed it off.  Related Image Expand / Contract Reuters (Nov. 17, 2015: Cast member Harvey Keitel poses at the premiere of "Youth" at Directors Guild of America in Los Angeles, California.)  Because of their intervention, the Army had Quinn and Martland removed from the camp in Kunduz Province and eventually sent home from Afghanistan. Quinn has since left the Army, but Martland was ordered discharged, a decision he continues to fight. The incident is not officially the reason for the discharge, but was seen as contributing to his separation.  Martland has called the decision to discharge him “morally wrong.” Broadly speaking, military leaders have defended the response to abuse allegations in Afghanistan and say soldiers weren't instructed to look the other way amid reports of other such incidents.  But the Army has deliberated over Martland’s case for months.  In his email lending support to the Green Beret, Keitel, 76, said U.S. values are on the line.  “I am a citizen of the US, married, a father, actor and former Marine. American values are on the line here, and no person I know would not have taken the same actions SFC Martland and Capt. Daniel Quinn did to protect a child, period,” he wrote. “That’s an American value.”
Just a few weeks ago, only the Republicans were talking seriously about the possibility of a contested presidential convention. Now, Bernie Sanders’ campaign is ratcheting up predictions that Democrats, too, could have an open convention in July.  The odds remain stacked against the Vermont senator, no matter what his campaign says. And Hillary Clinton’s campaign is aggressively batting down talk of a Philadelphia free-for-all this summer.  But the Democratic underdog’s recent winning streak – bolstered Tuesday by a decisive victory in the Wisconsin primary – has dashed for now Clinton’s hopes of swiftly sewing up the nomination and pivoting to the general election, certainly not while the springtime cherry blossoms are still on the trees in Washington. The Sanders camp’s bold predictions speak to their hope that they can now drag out the race until July by blunting the front-runner’s pledged delegate gains.  “It will be an open convention, likely with neither candidate having a majority of pledged delegates," Sanders campaign manager Jeff Weaver told CNN on Tuesday.  Those predictions were met with a round of reality checks by team Clinton.  Campaign manager Robby Mook blasted out a fundraising memo Tuesday night, as Sanders was rolling to victory in Wisconsin, saying Clinton’s delegate lead “is nearly insurmountable.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  He said the Sanders camp, in pushing for an open convention, is trying to “flip delegates’ votes, overturning the will of the voters.”  The big question is what specifically it would take for Clinton to avoid an open convention.  The complicating factor is the role played by “superdelegates,” party insiders free to support whomever they want. When those delegates and “pledged” delegates awarded via primaries and caucuses are added together, Clinton has a huge 1,748-1,058 delegate lead.  She would need to win just 635 of the remaining delegates – roughly a third -- to get a majority of total delegates, or 2,383, before the convention. Given her record in the primaries so far, that’s hardly a heavy lift.  But when only pledged delegates are counted, Clinton’s lead is narrower, at 1,279-1,027.  Despite Weaver’s comment, Clinton could easily win a majority of them with roughly 43 percent of the remaining pledged delegates.  The Sanders campaign, however, may be setting the bar much higher. If they argue Clinton must win 2,383 pledged delegates to clinch the nomination – in other words, hit a majority of all delegates counting only pledged delegates – she would need more than 60 percent of the remaining pledged field.  Democratic strategist Mary Anne Marsh said she thinks that’s what the Sanders campaign is saying.  Whether the Democratic National Committee sees it the same way is unclear.  Asked specifically what it would take to avoid an open convention, a DNC official reiterated that 2,383 represents the majority of all delegates, but would not speculate beyond that.  The Sanders campaign is not entirely clear, either, on how an open convention would emerge.  Sanders press secretary Symone D. Sanders told FoxNews.com the campaign is focused on simply winning states, predicting a strong showing in the Wyoming caucuses this weekend, before the race heads next to New York and other delegate-rich territory.  “There is a path to the nomination for us,” she said, adding that they will go to Philadelphia but not elaborating on what exactly might trigger an open convention in their eyes.  So what’s the end-game?  Even if Clinton’s pledged delegate support is a little short, the former secretary of state still has hundreds of superdelegates on her side.  Weaver noted to CNN that the superdelegates “don’t count” until they vote at the convention. But unless the Sanders camp could somehow wrest away huge swaths of that support, the best case scenario for Sanders might be an open convention in name only – where superdelegates put Clinton over the top as soon as the voting begins.  “She’ll use the superdelegates to finish it off if she doesn’t hit that bar [with pledged delegates],” strategist Mary Anne Marsh said.  She, too, described Clinton’s lead as “insurmountable,” and played down the possibility of a contested convention.  “This is more wishful thinking on the part of the Sanders campaign than anything based on facts or math,” she told FoxNews.com, while questioning whether Sanders might try to use his delegates as leverage to extract some wishlist item at the convention.  Mook said in a memo posted on Medium that “the delegate math is on our side.” He noted that even among pledged delegates, Clinton has a sizeable lead, and the upcoming contests pose another challenge for Sanders.  “[W]ith each passing week, it’s becoming increasingly unlikely that Senator Sanders will be able to catch up. In order to do so, Sanders has to win the four remaining delegate-rich primaries — New York, Pennsylvania, California, and New Jersey — with roughly 60 percent of the vote,” Mook said.  Clinton in the meantime is taking a tougher tone toward Sanders, even telling Politico’s Glenn Thrush she’s not sure he’s a real Democrat.  “He’s a relatively new Democrat, and, in fact, I’m not even sure he is one,” she said. “He’s running as one. So I don’t know quite how to characterize him.”  FoxNews.com’s Cody Derespina contributed to this report.
A pattern is starting to emerge that holds both promise and peril for Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump:  Trump does better in “open” primary contests where members of either party can vote, while Texas Sen. Ted Cruz tends to do better in "closed" contests limited only to registered Republicans.  The pattern could lend credence to Cruz’s claim that he’s the “consistent conservative” in the race, and continue to pose challenges for Trump as more closed contests – including the critical Florida primary – loom on the election calendar.  But if Trump indeed is being boosted by crossover voters, it suggests he’s a stronger general election candidate than Democrats give him credit for.  “Trump’s got crossover appeal,” said Christopher C. Hull, former chief of staff for Cruz backer and Iowa Rep. Steve King.  To date, Trump has won a dozen contests, seven of which were open to voters regardless of party affiliation – and two of which have a hybrid system. He has won only three contests that were limited to registered Republicans – Nevada, Kentucky and Louisiana. (His victories in the latter two states were relatively tight.)  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  By contrast, five of Cruz’s six victories came in closed or semi-closed contests. The only exception was Texas, his home state.  Hull, president of the D.C.-based public affairs firm Issue Management Inc., who previously worked with an arm of a pro-Cruz super PAC, said this speaks to the kinds of voters each candidate appeals to. “Cruz’s supporters are conservatives, and Trump’s supporters are populists,” he said. “Some of [Trump’s supporters] are Reagan Democrats, some of them are Perot independents.”  But he said even though Cruz may be drawing in the grassroots conservatives, “It’s good to have crossover appeal.” He said Trump’s performance in the open primaries bodes well for his competitiveness in a general election.  Trump likes to boast he’s growing the party beyond its traditional base, bringing in Democrats and minorities and other groups who might not normally support a Republican candidate.  “Why can't the leaders of the Republican Party see that I am bringing in new voters by the millions-we are creating a larger, stronger party!” he tweeted after his Super Tuesday wins last week.  Still, Democrats – in public, anyway – doubt Trump, with his inflammatory rhetoric and controversial proposals, could truly build a big-tent campaign.  At Sunday’s Democratic debate, both Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders claimed they’d relish the opportunity to run against Trump in November, with Sanders even joking he’d give his “right arm.”  There may be another factor at play, though, in the contests thus far – and that is Cruz is performing better in the smaller, caucus states where organization matters most.  Republican strategist Adam Goodman, with The Victory Group, told FoxNews.com he thinks the results so far are a “reflection of organization.”  “Cruz is very well-organized. I think he came into this campaign with a strong investment in social media and on-the-ground troops, and I think that pays off especially in caucus states and smaller states,” he said. “Donald Trump maybe is a lot of things, in his campaign as well, but his campaign will not be written about in the record books as having the most organized effort in America.”  The upcoming primary calendar, though, doesn’t necessarily favor one type of contest over the other.  Two states are holding closed Republican contests on Tuesday, Hawaii and Idaho. But another two are holding open contests, Michigan and Mississippi. And while Florida’s primary on March 15 is closed, the contests in Ohio, Illinois and Missouri are open.  Meanwhile, the other two Republican candidates are fighting to notch their own wins wherever they can.  Marco Rubio, who has only won contests in Minnesota and Puerto Rico, is banking on a victory in his home state of Florida but has been trailing Trump in the polls there. John Kasich, the Ohio governor who mounted a very short-lived presidential campaign in the 2000 race and has yet to win a contest this cycle, is vowing to win in his home state as well.  Even as Trump and Cruz dominate the contests, it is unclear whether anyone could gain the necessary 1,237 delegates needed to clinch the nomination before the July convention. As of Monday, Trump has 384 delegates; Cruz has 300; Rubio has 151; and Kasich has 37.
Despite the Obama administration touting its Iran nuclear deal as a triumph of diplomacy that finally thaws a four-decade freeze, Tehran appears to be doing all it can to keep the flames of confrontation burning.  The latest challenge was a missile launch over the weekend less than a mile from a U.S. aircraft carrier -- which came on the heels of two other similar incidents, two ballistic missile tests, and the harsh treatment of American prisoners including a Washington Post journalist.  These provocations, with the country potentially weeks away from receiving billions in sanctions relief under the nuclear deal, are fueling renewed concerns in Washington about whether Iran will be held to account for violations.  "Missile-tests, cyber-attacks, Americans taken hostage, and now this,” House Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Ed Royce, R-Calif., said in a statement Wednesday. “Until the Obama administration starts holding the Iranian regime accountable, we’ll see more of these hostile acts that put American lives in danger.”  The most recent confrontation occurred Saturday, when five Iranian Revolutionary Guard vessels approached the USS Harry S. Truman, and one of them fired multiple unguided missiles within 1,500 yards of the U.S. aircraft carrier transiting the Strait of Hormuz. It was the third such provocation in the past 14 months, a spokesman for the Navy’s 5th Fleet, responsible for operations in the Persian Gulf, told Fox News.  “It’s getting closer,” Cmdr. Kevin Stephens said in discussing this trend of Iranian provocation near U.S. aircraft carrier battle groups.  In April, as the USS Theodore Roosevelt exited the Strait of Hormuz to pursue an Iranian flotilla carrying weapons in the direction of Yemen, a group of Iranian Revolutionary Guard small boats launched 11 unguided rockets five nautical miles from the aircraft carrier, Stephens said. One nautical mile equals 1.151 miles.  In October 2014, a Navy helicopter from the USS George H.W. Bush also observed Iranian small boats launching several unguided rockets about eight nautical miles away, he said.  The group of missile boats that approached the USS Harry S. Truman, as well as her escort ships, the day after Christmas launched missiles within 1,500 yards of the aircraft carrier following an impromptu announcement over bridge-to-bridge maritime radio just 23 minutes earlier. The first missiles were launched from inside internationally recognized maritime traffic lanes and Omani territorial waters, according to Stephens.  The Iranian missiles were fired just after Truman and her escort ships exited the Strait of Hormuz, according to a defense official. The American aircraft carrier had helicopters in the air after the launch “closely observing” the boats, which passed away from the U.S. and French Navy ships. F-18 Super Hornets also were ready to launch from Truman had the situation escalated further, the defense official said. The Strait of Hormuz connects the Gulf of Oman to the Persian Gulf.  “The [Iranian Navy’s] actions were highly provocative. Firing weapons so close to passing coalition ships and commercial traffic within an internationally recognized maritime traffic lane is unsafe,” Stephens said.  The incident, first reported by NBC News, marks another flare-up as the Iranian nuclear pact is poised to take full effect.  Ahead of the planned sanctions relief, Iran earlier this week Iran shipped 25,000 pounds of low-enriched uranium to Russia as part of the agreement.  Secretary of State John Kerry called the transfer a “significant milestone.”  Yet on the sidelines, congressional lawmakers have been fuming over a series of missile firings.  Fox News was first to report the Nov. 21 launch of a Ghadr-110, a medium-range ballistic missile with a range of 1,200 miles, capable of striking U.S. military assets in the region as well as Israel.  Following the Fox News report of the second ballistic missile launch, U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., wrote a letter to President Obama, signed by 35 of her GOP Senate colleagues, calling on the administration not to lift sanctions on Iran.  The launch in November followed a much more publicized ballistic missile launch inside Iran in October, which drew condemnation from U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Samantha Power. The Iranian military released a video of the October launch as well as a video showing an underground network of tunnels where missiles are allegedly being stored.  Earlier this month, the United Nations said Iran had violated U.N. Security Council resolutions following the October launch. It is unclear how far the United Nations or United States will go to respond to the violations – though on Wednesday, the Treasury Department notified Capitol Hill of new pending sanctions against 11 individuals and entities accused of supporting Iran’s ballistic missile program.  Twenty-one Democratic senators also wrote to Obama last week voicing concerns about those missile launches.  “If there are no consequences for this violation, Iran’s leaders will certainly also question the willingness of the international community to respond to violations of the [nuclear agreement],” they wrote.  Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, pointed to the latest rocket launch in the Strait of Hormuz in warning Wednesday against rushing into sanctions relief.  “[T]he Administration continues to turn a blind eye to Iranian saber rattling,” he said in a statement. “A rush to sanctions relief threatens to embolden an increasingly aggressive Iranian regime that has no intention of normalizing relations with the West or of retreating from a malign policy intended to destabilize the Middle East.”  Some lawmakers are pushing for Congress to renew an expiring Iran sanctions law, as leverage in case the U.S. needs to snap back sanctions should Iran violate the deal.  Yet Iran also is fuming over a Congress-passed law restricting people who have recently visited Iran or people holding dual Iranian citizenship from visiting the U.S. without a visa, a move the Iranian government called a violation of the nuclear agreement.  Foreign Ministry spokesman Hossein Jaberi Ansari said at a news conference that “any steps taken outside the agreement are unacceptable to Iran, and Iran will take its own steps in response where necessary."  Fox News’ Kara Rowland contributed to this report.  Lucas Tomlinson is the Pentagon and State Department producer for Fox News Channel. You can follow him on Twitter: @LucasFoxNews
President Obama may be struggling to tilt the balance of the Supreme Court – but that doesn’t mean he hasn’t already made his mark on the bench.  The president, over the course of his two terms, has appointed hundreds of justices to the lower federal courts, leading to a majority of appeals courts now dominated by Democratic picks. While those nomination battles aren’t nearly as high-profile as they are for the high court, the impact of the appointments is just as pronounced.  “It's often overlooked, but nominees to the lower courts ... are often one of the most important legacies a president leaves behind,” said Elizabeth Wydra, president of the Constitutional Accountability Center.  The Fourth Circuit, which sits just one level below the Supreme Court and is headquartered in Richmond, Va., is a prime example.  Previously viewed as one of the most conservative appellate courts in the country, it has drifted significantly to the left, with Democratic appointees now outnumbering their Republican counterparts two-to-one.  That circuit not only recently struck down North Carolina’s voter ID law, but also ruled in favor of a transgender student seeking to use high school bathroom facilities matching the student’s gender identity rather than biological gender.  The tilt on the federal appeals courts – particularly as the Supreme Court, which takes relatively few cases as it is, remains split 4-4 – is a trend that worries conservatives.  “The Supreme Court takes very few cases, there's not an opportunity to correct every error made -- and when you have activist judges at the lower levels of the federal judiciary, that can have a damaging effect on [the] American system and rule of law,” said Carrie Severino, chief counsel and policy director at the Judicial Crisis Network.  The president has successfully seated a total of 329 federal judges during his two terms – all of them, lifetime appointments.  When Obama took office, only three appellate courts had more Democrat-appointed judges than Republican-appointed judges.  Now, nine of the 13 circuits do.  His pace of federal judicial appointments is in line with his predecessors'. George W. Bush appointed 330, and Bill Clinton appointed 379, according to federal data.  The U.S. Supreme Court hears only 70-80 cases a year, making the lower courts even more important as they handle hundreds of thousands of cases each year, often representing the final word on critical issues.  And it’s not just the cases they decide. It’s how they decide them, crafting the framework for how legal disputes will be handled going forward.  “President Obama's nominees to the Supreme Court, in particular, will be a legacy for him not just because they may cast more liberal votes than justices a conservative president would've put on, but also because of the way they talk about the law and the Constitution,” Wydra said.  Obama also worked to remake the D.C. Circuit, by forcing through three nominees, with the help of then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, who changed the rules of the Senate in order to make that happen.  One of the key issues the D.C. Circuit considers is the use of executive power.  Meanwhile, Obama’s nominee to fill the Supreme Court vacancy, Merrick Garland, remains stalled in the Senate. However, Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley, who chairs the Senate Judiciary Committee, said Monday that if Hillary Clinton wins the November election, it’s possible the Senate could actually move on Garland’s nomination –- if a “large number” of senators pressed Grassley to do so.
For decades, the Pierce family has operated a peat-mining business that involves draining muddy bogs, scraping away the plant material, drying it, then selling it for use in golf greens and athletic fields.  The company hoped to add hundreds of acres to its operation. But in 2011, the Army Corps of Engineers announced the Minnesota land in question was connected to the Red River, roughly 120 miles away, and would be subjected to the Clean Water Act permitting process.  The property rights dispute landed Wednesday in the Supreme Court, where Justice Anthony Kennedy called the federal act “quite vague in its reach, arguably unconstitutionally vague ... ."  The property owners are fighting for the right to challenge the corps’ findings in federal court, while the corps argues the landowners cannot do so without going through a time-consuming permitting process that will likely cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.  “We're talking about the effect, direct effect on millions of land owners nationwide, couldn't be a bigger precedent,” said the plaintiffs' attorney, Reed Hopper of the Pacific Legal Foundation.  With the exception of Justice Elena Kagan, the court seemed nearly unanimous in its skepticism about whether the property is indeed “wetland” and subject to the act.  Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg called the process “arduous and very expensive.”  “It’s going to take years and cost ... a lot of money," she also said.  Deputy Solicitor General Malcolm Steward, the federal government’s attorney, argued the landowner could simply roll the dice by moving ahead with developing the land despite the court’s findings.  That prompted Justice Stephen Breyer to respond: “Then he goes to jail.”  A decision is due by the end of June.  Kevin Pierce, one of three land/ business-owners in the case -- U.S. Army Corps of Engineers v. Hawkes Co. Inc. -- has not been willing to take such a risk.  "We could have expanded a couple of years ago and different things,” he said outside of the court room. “But we've been held up because of the threat of high fines and criminal charges and all of the things that come out of the corps and jurisdictional determination.  Critics of President Obama’s Supreme Court nomination, Merrick Garland, say the case is the kind they’re worried about if Garland is appointed to the high court, considering his overwhelming deference to federal agencies.
The Obama administration is facing growing pressure to step up and formally call the violence against Christians in the Middle East genocide, as evidence of atrocities mounts ahead of a looming deadline to decide on a label.  The pressure comes amid scores of reports that Christians are being slaughtered, that Christian women are being raped and sold into slavery, and that Christian churches are being demolished.  Less than a year ago, a video surfaced purporting to show 30 Ethiopian Christian men marched onto a beach before being beheaded and shot by the Islamic State, supposedly for refusing to renounce their faith.  But with the administration facing a March 17 deadline to decide how to label the situation, officials have hedged when asked which way they may decide.  Secretary of State John Kerry faced tough questioning on Capitol Hill days ago, when pressed on why the administration hasn’t yet called the violence genocide.  “It does require a lot of fact-gathering,” Kerry said at a House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing. “I mean you have to get the facts from the ground, more than just anecdotal.”  Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Calif., countered that “the whole world knows that Christians are being slaughtered in the Middle East.”  “It's clear,” he continued, “it's time for America to act -- and the excuse that we've got to study it, we've got to ask the lawyers what the wording is … It's unacceptable.”  A new ad, and petition drive, launched by the Knights of Columbus and In Defense of Christians is putting additional pressure on the administration, citing statements from presidential candidates of both parties calling what’s happening genocide.  “With the U.S. Commission on International [Religious] Freedom having stating this, with 200-plus bipartisan sponsors [of a House resolution] having stated this, with the major presidential candidates of both parties having stated this, the question is, does the State Department want to stand alone as a genocide denier?” Andrew Walther, a vice president with the Knights of Columbus, told Fox News.  He said the U.S. has a “checkered past” in terms of labeling mass killings as genocide, and said there's “a real opportunity here to get it right.”  “All you have to do is look at the pictures and you know this is genocide,” Walther said.
The U.S. Supreme Court on Tuesday heard a challenge from a group of Republican voters who claim Arizona’s Independent Redistricting Commission violated the principle of one-person, one-vote when it created districts with more residents  than others.  The commission was made up of two Republicans, two Democrats and one unaffiliated member. It was tasked with drawing legislative district boundaries for the state following the 2010 U.S. Census. The commission worked on various options, ultimately tailoring its plan to be compliant with the Voting Rights Act.  At the time, Arizona was covered by a VRA provision mandating that its legislative districts be "pre-cleared" by either the attorney general or a federal three-judge panel.  The resulting district boundaries sparked a lawsuit by voters who claim the maps favor Democrats by diluting Republican votes in certain districts and violate the Equal Protection Clause.  A three-judge federal court ruled in favor of the commission, finding that -- while some of the members were driven in part "by a desire to improve Democratic prospects in the affected districts" -- the commission was primarily motivated by trying to comply with the VRA.  However, after the case had been argued and while the district court's opinion was pending, the Supreme Court decided Shelby County v. Holder, striking the portion of the VRA which required Arizona to get pre-clearance for its district boundaries.  The lower court ultimately ruled that Shelby did not apply retroactively to the Arizona case. The bottom line question for the justices will be just how far a state can deviate from the "one-person, one-vote" principle in the interest of addressing other concerns.  The second case before the Supreme Court on Tuesday originated in Texas, where state senate districts are based on overall population numbers.  Two voters, from two different state districts, are suing based on the argument that districts should be drawn according to the number of eligible voters in a geographic area -- not overall population numbers. The argument goes: the votes of eligible voters are diluted in districts full of ineligible residents like illegal aliens and felons.  Critics of the lawsuit say it makes no sense to disregard those who cannot vote but still need representation, such as children and legal permanent residents.  There's also the question of how Texas would accurately assess how many ineligible residents live in any particular area. Once again, the case will require the justices to look at the concept of "one-person, one-vote" against the backdrop of Equal Protection Clause consideration.  Decisions in both cases are expected in June 2016.
Advocates are calling for the Obama administration to do more to aid hundreds of thousands of Middle East Christians fleeing the Islamic State and escaping situations where they are often told to either convert to Islam or die.  Many of those refugees are seeking asylum in the U.S., and activists want the government to do more to help them, arguing that the alternative is the extinction of their culture.  “I think Christians in Iraq and Syria are feeling a lot like the Jews felt before the Nazi Holocaust, and now is the time to get them out,” Johnnie Moore, author of "Defying ISIS," told Fox News. “Because the fact is if we don't get them out they could see the total elimination of their faith and culture.”  Others, like activist Mark Arabo, have taken matters into their own hands and have arranged private extractions, reuniting Christians from the Middle East with their families in countries that will accept them.  “We've always said these folks that we rescue -- they won't take any social assistance, they'll get a job. They'll make sure we have a home for them, they get language training. They don't want any special treatment,” Arabo said.  More On This... Christian refugees in Middle East seek asylum in the US  “They just want a chance to live,” Arabo said.  However, U.S. officials have said they are particularly concerned about applications from the Middle East, especially due to fears about terrorists exploiting the system and gaining entry to the U.S. under false pretenses and phony asylum claims.  In a statement to Fox News, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement said that when considering the cases, it “weighs a variety of factors, including the person’s conviction record, immigration history, ties to the community, risk of flight, and whether he or she poses a potential threat to public safety.”
Several legislative efforts to defund Planned Parenthood of federal tax dollars are in the works after two undercover videos appear to show doctors affiliated with the group discussing the exchange of organs and other body parts from aborted fetuses.  In the days after the videos went public, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, also a GOP presidential contender, announced he would move to strip some of the roughly $500 million in taxpayer money given to Planned Parenthood each year.  "This organization has absolutely zero respect for the sanctity of human life and is an affront to the most basic human dignity enshrined in our founding documents," he said.  On Sunday, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-K.Y., introduced a measure aimed at the same goal.  Over the last 10 years, Planned Parenthood has gotten more than $4 billion in state and federal government aid. Any bid to defund the organization may face long odds.  More On This... Can Rand Paul reignite his presidential campaign?  But how much is it costing you?  Taxpayer Calculator: CLICK TO SEE YOUR SHARE OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD COSTS  Here's a sample: Individuals making between $50,000 and $100,000 paid just $15.51 toward Planned Parenthood. However, those making more than that paid considerably more. Individuals making above $250,000 have paid, on average, roughly $420 toward the organization.  Planned Parenthood, though, is fighting back against efforts to strip federal funding. Planned Parenthood Federation of America President Cecile Richards, in her first live interview regarding the controversy, on Sunday said the organization has broken no laws and slammed the group that produced the videos, the Center for Medical Progress.  "The folks behind this, in fact, are part of the most militant wing of the anti-abortion movement that has been behind, you know, the bombing of clinics, the murder of doctors in their homes and in their churches," she told ABC's "This Week." "And that's what actually needs to be looked at."  Federal law prohibits the sale of human organs and commercial trafficking of human fetal remains, but Planned Parenthood maintains it was making donations to researchers and not profiting.  While some states have launched investigations into Planned Parenthood, in California, Attorney General Kamala Harris has vowed to look into whether CMP broke any laws.  CMP used actors posing as tissue-procurement buyers and shot video of a lunch meeting with a Planned Parenthood official in which she discussed performing an abortion in such a way as to preserve specific organs.  During that same meeting, the abortion doctor said the cost of specimens would range from roughly $30 to $100 each.  Republican Rep. Diane Black of Tennessee, a nurse for more than 40 years and a member of the Congressional Pro-Life Caucus, said the videos are disturbing. "This is a very indicting case where you sit at a table and negotiate," she said. "If they weren't selling these parts, why would they not meet with someone in an office setting and say, 'Here is what we do.'"  Black has submitted the Defund Planned Parenthood Act of 2015. It would place a moratorium on all federal funding for one year while Congress completes its own investigation.  A second CMP video records another doctor also discussing the transfer of fetal remains. During one part of the recording, as the parties discuss "compensation" for the body parts, she is recorded laughing as she states, "I want a Lamborghini."  Richards called the stealth recordings "a complete political smear campaign in order to cut off funding for basic health care for women in America at Planned Parenthood."  She also said doctors were lied to and entrapped. Richards said Planned Parenthood is fighting for women and called the group's treatment programs the "most important" thing.  Democrats have echoed those comments and seem unlikely to join any effort to defund the group.  Top House Democrat, Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, said Republicans have been "out to get" Planned Parenthood for "as long as" she can remember. Pelosi is also among those advocating for an investigation of CMP.  "Women's health is what is at stake, and Planned Parenthood is a very important part of promoting women's health in our country," she said.  2016 Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton, meanwhile, has said little about the controversy. After the release of the second video, Clinton said she didn't have all of the facts but that Planned Parenthood had apologized for the insensitivity of its employees in the discussions captured on video.  Clinton also said she thought it was "unfortunate that Planned Parenthood had been the object of such concerted attacks for so many years and it's really an attack against women's rights to choose."  With the August congressional recess looming, it's unclear how GOP lawmakers plan to proceed on the measures aimed at stripping Planned Parenthood of funding. Many states also provide funding to the organization, and battles over those state tax dollars have likewise been heated in recent years.
Same-sex marriage foes are flagging a mostly-missed moment from last week's Supreme Court arguments over the constitutionality of gay marriage, calling it a warning sign for religious freedom.  They point to an exchange between Justice Samuel Alito and the administration's top lawyer, Solicitor General Donald Verrilli. Alito asked if, in the event the Supreme Court holds that there is a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, would religious colleges risk losing their tax-exempt status if they continued to advocate for traditional marriage only.  Verrilli responded, "I don't deny that ... It is going to be an issue."  Travis Weber, director of the Family Research Council's Center for Religious Liberty, said he believed Verrilli's logic would eventually extend to churches and just about "anyone holding a traditional view of marriage."  Weber warned that if the current trend continues, those who refuse to endorse same-sex marriage could face "fines, potentially imprisonment."  Just days ago, speaking at the Women in the World Summit 2016, Democratic contender Hillary Clinton said, "Deep-seated cultural codes, religious beliefs and structural biases have to be changed."  The statement sparked concern among those who believe the federal government should not be in the business of using its significant leverage to coerce others to adhere to any specific viewpoint.  There is also concern among the religious community that the IRS has reached some sort of agreement with the Freedom From Religion Foundation (FFRF), which was in the process of suing the agency.  In a legal document dated July 29, 2014, the IRS pledged to engage in tougher monitoring and enforcement of political restrictions on churches, in exchange for FFRF's promise to drop its lawsuit.  Attached to that document is a letter explaining that at least 99 churches had been referred for a "high level examination" by the IRS' "Political Activities Referral Committee."  Despite numerous Freedom of Information Act requests for documents related to any deal with FFRF, the IRS has been less than forthcoming.  As a result, Judicial Watch, a conservative but nonpartisan organization, has filed a federal lawsuit asking that the IRS be forced to disclose them.  When asked to explain Verrilli’s comment, the White House referred Fox News to the Justice Department, which also declined comment and suggested contacting the IRS.The IRS did not immediately respond.
©2016 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. All market data delayed 20 minutes. New Privacy - New Terms of Use (What's New) - FAQ


I’ve been saying for a year and a half that the mainstream media have been underestimating Donald Trump, that too many journalists failed to grasp the deep disaffection and anxieties of millions of Americans drawn to his candidacy.  I said this, and wrote this, when Trump was up and when he was down. I argued it as leading journalists and media critics insisted Trump was such a dangerous force that they had to drop their usual standards and stop him. And I did this not because I’m a fan of any candidate but because I believe in journalism. Maybe I became a bit of a broken record, but I felt really deeply about this.  Now, after perhaps the biggest political upset in American history, many people in the business are saying the same thing.  It was a failure of historic proportions.  It was a failure rooted in hubris, insularity and just plain bias.  It was a failure spawned by a mindset that dismissed what part of the country wanted because it seemed unimaginable that Trump would not be found unfit.  And it was a failure that the media are doomed to repeat again and again if they don’t fundamentally change how they do business.  Those who try to shrug it off as the product of flawed polling or faulty predictions are missing the much larger point. On the mechanics, the Trump victory exposed the media’s perpetual overemphasis on fundraising, ads, ground game and data operations, all of which theoretically gave Hillary Clinton a huge advantage. But these things don't mean much if you don’t have a candidate with a winning message.  This isn’t about the blocking and tackling of politics, however. It’s about the heart and soul of media credibility.  I was literally stunned at the banner headline in yesterday’s New York Times: “DEMOCRATS, STUDENTS AND FOREIGN ALLIES FACE THE REALITY OF A TRUMP PRESIDENCY.”  Think about that. The man just won a smashing victory, and that headline basically says that people—the kind of people that Times editors view sympathetically—are shocked and appalled.  Can you imagine such a headline for an upset win by an unorthodox Democrat—say, Bernie Sanders? I can’t.  To his credit, Jim Rutenberg, the New York Times media columnist, addressed this question to his profession: “How did you get it so wrong?  “The question came in letters. (‘To editors and writers of The NYT,’ one reader wrote, ‘you were so wrong for so long. You misled your readers and were blinded by your own journalistic bigotry.’)”  And Rutenberg quoted Executive Editor Dean Baquet as saying: “If I have a mea culpa for journalists and journalism, it’s that we’ve got to do a much better job of being on the road, out in the country, talking to different kinds of people than the people we talk to — especially if you happen to be a New York-based news organization — and remind ourselves that New York is not the real world.”  Amen.  Of course, Rutenberg also wrote in August that if a working journalist believes Trump “is a demagogue playing to the nation’s worst racist and nationalistic tendencies…if you view a Trump presidency as something that’s potentially dangerous, then your reporting is going to reflect that.”  But at least he’s asking the right questions now.  Washington Post media columnist Margaret Sullivan, no fan of Trump, nonetheless chides her profession:  “To put it bluntly, the media missed the story. In the end, a huge number of American voters wanted something different. And although these voters shouted and screamed it, most journalists just weren’t listening. They didn’t get it.  “They didn’t get that the huge, enthusiastic crowds at Donald Trump’s rallies would really translate into that many votes. They couldn’t believe that the America they knew could embrace someone who mocked a disabled man, bragged about sexually assaulting women, and spouted misogyny, racism and anti-Semitism.  “It would be too horrible. So, therefore, according to some kind of magical thinking, it couldn’t happen.”  And Sullivan, a former editor of the Buffalo News, makes the cultural point that journalists are “college-educated, urban and, for the most part, liberal” and more likely to live in New York, D.C. and the West Coast. “And although we touched down in the big red states for a few days, or interviewed some coal miners or unemployed autoworkers in the Rust Belt, we didn’t take them seriously. Or not seriously enough.”  Or we somehow decided that we knew what was best for them.  These problems are so deep-rooted that they are going to be difficult to solve. But first there has to be a will to solve them, not just a few days of ritual hand-wringing before returning to business as usual.  President Obama was gracious toward the man he denounced during the campaign in their White House meeting yesterday. It’s time for the media to move past the election and attempt to cover the new president with a fairness that has previously eluded them.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
Things are getting ugly in the liberal precincts of the media.  As the news business tries to grapple with the previously unthinkable—a Trump presidency—some of its left-wing practitioners are venting their rage, both at the country and at the press.  Jamelle Bouie, an African-American and a top political writer for Slate, tweeted: “I didn’t quite understand how much white people hated us, or could at least live with that hate. Now I do.”  That was before Bouie apologized for misunderstanding the election but after he wrote that Trump “all but cried [the N-word].”  Jeff Jarvis, a liberal media critic, author and blogger who directs a journalism program at the City University of New York, blamed the press, tweeting:  “I fear that journalism is irredeemably broken, a failure. My profession failed to inform the public about the fascist they are electing.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Jarvis also wrote: “I'll say it: This is the victory of the uneducated and uninformed.” (He blamed others as well, including his race for “inherent racism,” his gender for “sexism” and himself.)  Can anyone seriously suggest that the press didn't go all out in investigating every aspect of Trump's life and career? But if you're convinced he's a fascist, you think journalists somehow fell down on the job.  Now let me say that I understand passions are running high in the wake of a bitter and divisive election. Donald Trump said things during the campaign that many people understandably found offensive. And since Tuesday morning began with the widespread expectation that Hillary Clinton would become the first woman to win the White House, I understand the crushing disappointment for those commentators who were sympathetic to her cause.  But the vitriol is deeply unattractive—and goes to the heart of why the media misjudged Trump, and his supporters, for a year and a half.  The Republican nominee pulled off the incredibly difficult feat of capturing Michigan and Wisconsin because he struck a deep chord, there and elsewhere, with white, paycheck-to-paycheck Americans who are angry and frustrated at a political system that does little for them. And most journalists who work for national news organizations are simply out of touch with those folks.  Imagine how these liberal journalists would have reacted if Clinton, who gave a gracious concession speech yesterday, had won and Trump supporters were still calling her a liar and criminal who should be locked up.  To dump on the people who back Trump as a bunch of dumb, racist yahoos is to say that they’re simply too idiotic and prejudiced to vote in their own self-interest, unlike we the media, who know what's best for them.  Instead we have commentators and media outlets on the left doubling and tripling down. The Huffington Post, which embarrassed itself by long relegating Trump to the entertainment section, started with this headline: “Nightmare: President Trump.” Followed by “Mourning in America.” Although the website now plans to drop the editor’s note on every story declaring Trump to be a racist, sexist xenophobe.  David Remnick, editor of the New Yorker, wrote:  “The election of Donald Trump to the Presidency is nothing less than a tragedy for the American republic, a tragedy for the Constitution, and a triumph for the forces, at home and abroad, of nativism, authoritarianism, misogyny, and racism. Trump’s shocking victory, his ascension to the Presidency, is a sickening event in the history of the United States and liberal democracy.”  Others played up the racial angle. Van Jones, a CNN commentator who once served in the Obama White House, called Trump’s win “a white-lash against a black president.” President Obama, though, was not on the ballot.  Still others played the sexism card. Salon called Hillary’s loss “The Misogyny Apocalypse…It was unimaginable that America would self-destruct rather than elect a female president.”  Keep in mind that many conservative commentators were also in the #NeverTrump camp. But National Review congratulated him in an editorial, while hoping he can win the trust of the part of the country that views him as unfit. The Weekly Standard, whose editor Bill Kristol was an implacable foe, ran a piece by Fred Barnes titled “Trump Didn’t Split the GOP—He Strengthened It.”  Back in 1968, the Washington Post cartoonist Herblock made a decision when Richard Nixon, whom he had always portrayed as a sinister-looking guy with a 5 o’clock shadow, won the election. He declared that he gave every new president a clean shave, and Nixon’s stubble vanished.  As the country prepares for the next four years, Trump’s liberal critics—while obviously entitled to battle the 45th president--might show a similar graciousness.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
Early this morning, after he had stunned the world by winning the presidency, Donald Trump took a call from a longtime confidant.  "Nobody believed in me," Trump said. Literally, only two or three people, he said, had thought he could pull this off -- and at times, not even Trump himself. Now he had a lengthening call list of world leaders who wanted to pay their respects to the new leader of the free world.  It was a starkly different scene last June, when the businessman was still seen as a hopeless underdog. Trump was on his blue-and-red Boeing 757, huddling with his top staffers, who were begging him not to talk about Gonzalo Curiel.  Trump had a score to settle. He told his staff he wanted to denounce the judge handling the lawsuit against Trump University. His advisers pushed back hard, saying this would be a huge distraction, that Trump had to be seen as fighting for America, not for himself.  The unofficial Republican nominee took the plunge anyway, calling the Indiana-born judge, whose parents were from Mexico, a “hater” who had “an inherent conflict of interest.”  Those attacks, denounced by some Republican leaders, created a political uproar that haunted the campaign for weeks. It was an early harbinger of a self-destructive tendency that would damage Trump’s candidacy again and again: his insistence on straying from scripted messages to indulge in attacks and counterattacks against those he felt had wronged him.  It was that compulsion to repeatedly blow past the stop signs erected by his strategists that one confidante described as a condition: “defiance disorder.”  The back story of this campaign is how some of Trump's advisers tried again and again to rein him in, failing time after time, and privately concluded that he could not be managed -- and therefore was unlikely to win. Only in the final weeks, when the race seemed all but lost, did Trump find a way to stop stepping on his message -- and paved the way for his stunning upset.  Trump was a genuine phenomenon, an outsider who used gut instincts, media mastery and a blunt, often divisive message to beat better-funded rivals and outfox an often hostile press corps.  But throughout the long campaign, Trump's greatest strength was his most glaring weakness, one that frustrated a rotating cadre of advisers until the very end. His tough street talk was both popular and polarizing; his stream-of-consciousness delivery both mesmerizing and undisciplined; his Twitter attacks both devastating and distracting. At times, even his fiercest loyalists wondered whether he really wanted the presidency, which once seemed far out of reach but came to be a tantalizing mirage, receding as he came closer.  Internal rivalries on the tiny team didn’t help matters. Corey Lewandowski, his first campaign manager, harnessed Trump’s energy but drew flak for giving the candidate too much leeway (though he pushed back when necessary). The second, Paul Manafort, took heat for spending time in the Hamptons and lacking a personal rapport with Trump (though his mission was to mend fences with the Beltway establishment). The third, Kellyanne Conway, was chided for spending too much time on TV (a chief part of her job) and contradicting some of Trump’s statements (though she remained grounded in facts, such as the poor poll numbers he tried to dismiss as phony).  Most campaign aides viewed Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law, the 35-year-old publisher of a Manhattan weekly with no political experience, as the de facto campaign manager. There was a growing sense at the top that no one wanted to cross Ivanka’s husband or bring bad news to the candidate. Ivanka, Eric and Don Jr. would weigh in to counter what they saw as bad advice, but they and others would also send uncomfortable messages through Hope Hicks, Trump’s low-key press secretary. Hicks, 28, was constantly at his side, a former fashion model who became such a trusted counselor that Trump would openly worry, when he flouted the team’s directives, about disappointing her.  “Can I win? Can I win?” Trump would ask his strategists in the closing weeks, though he often defied their advice, refusing to eliminate trips to Pennsylvania, Colorado and other states that he had virtually no chance of winning.  Over and over, the real estate mogul displayed a fingertip feel for public sentiment and remarkable ability to bounce back, despite being written off by what he came to view as the corrupt media. He would criticize Mexican rapists, John McCain, Carly Fiorina’s face, call for a temporary ban on Muslim immigrants, and yet drive the news agenda and keep on winning. But that was with Republican primary voters.  On the broader stage, running against a Democrat whose unpopularity nearly matched his, Trump’s own words became the most potent weapons against him.  The pattern was remarkably consistent. Trump would hone a successful message, stick to the script — often reading from once-disparaged teleprompters — and wind up chafing at the rhetorical shackles.  His savvier advisers would realize that he wasn’t having fun. And then he would rebel. He would create a new narrative. It could be a phrase, a tweet, an extended riff in front of a rapturous crowd. Trump would mar the story line, blame the media for twisting his words, keep defending or tweaking his remarks, and suddenly he was no longer talking about taxes or terrorism.  **  Over the summer, Trump retweeted an anti-Hillary graphic with a pile of cash and what looked like a Star of David. When the ensuing flap prompted his staff to delete the star, Trump was furious. He denied the image was anti-Semitic, attacked Clinton, kept talking about it and turned what might have been a half-day incident into a running story.  When a gunman killed 49 people at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Trump didn’t issue the usual thoughts-and-prayers refrain. Instead, he tweeted: “Appreciate the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism, I don't want congrats, I want toughness & vigilance.”  He dug a deeper hole the next day on “Fox & Friends,” faulting President Obama for his approach to radical Islamic terrorism: “We're led by a man that either is not tough, not smart, or he's got something else in mind.” His strategists were stunned as critics assailed Trump for insinuating that an American president might be sympathetic to terrorism.  But Trump refused to budge, again dragging out the controversy. “I don’t think Orlando was a mistake at all,” he told me. “I’m saying what everyone else is saying and thinking. The problem is everyone wants to be politically correct, and you can’t be politically correct because these people are after our country.”  During the Democratic convention, Trump held a news conference -- his favorite venue for stealing attention -- and said this about his rival: “Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing.” Though it seemed like a tongue-in-cheek comment, the press went haywire, the New York Times sternly accusing him of “essentially urging a foreign adversary to conduct cyberespionage against a former secretary of state.”  That was a ripple compared to the tidal wave of negativity unleashed after Khizr Khan and his wife, who had lost a son in Iraq, castigated Trump at the Philadelphia convention. Trump told ABC’s George Stephanopoulos that “if you look at his wife, she was standing there, she had nothing to say, she probably — maybe she wasn’t allowed to have anything to say.”  The staff pounced on him. One adviser told Trump that he was getting “killed” over the issue, that he had dropped 5 to 7 points in the polls, that he could not sustain this. Trump knew it was a losing issue, his strategists believed, but could not let go.  Trump kept up his assault on the Gold Star family for days as his strategists frantically tried to change the subject. Once again, Trump’s insistence on punching back at his detractors -- no matter how ill-advised -- badly hurt him.  But even then, Trump believed he had said nothing wrong. “The media was not treating the statements fairly,” he told me. “I mean, they would chop them up and then shorten the statement, and it didn’t sound proper or didn’t sound as good when they did that. It was very unfair.”  **  All these factors -- Trump’s unorthodox style, pugilistic instincts and a staff torn between professionals and family members -- came together in the runup to the first debate at Hofstra University. Too many people were involved in debate prep, drifting in and out, including two generals with no political experience. Trump got too much conflicting advice. Advisers would send memos, but the candidate had little patience for anything longer than a paragraph and preferred verbal briefings. Supremely self-confident, he refused to follow the conventional practice of holding mock debates.  Trump stumbled against Clinton but insisted he had won the debate, calling surrogates to complain that they weren’t sufficiently defending him on the air. Some advisers felt he was too smart not to know the truth but too proud to admit it.  Worse, he had taken the bait on one of Clinton’s last answers, when she accused him of mocking the winner of his Miss Universe pageant two decades ago by calling her Miss Piggy.  On “Fox & Friends” the next morning, Trump raised Alicia Machado without even being asked, saying: “She was the worst we ever had -- the worst, the absolute worst. She was impossible…She gained a massive amount of weight and it was a real problem.”  For nearly a week, the candidate who trailed badly among women was insisting that a onetime beauty queen no one had heard of was a terrible person and too fat. He even tweeted that people should check out her “sex tape” (actually an under-the-covers scene in a Latino reality show). His staff was unable to persuade him to move on.  Trump sympathizers wondered why his staff didn’t boot him from Twitter. But Conway believed she couldn’t take his phone away, that he was a 70-year-old man who would ultimately say and do what he wanted. She managed him as best she could, sweet-talking rather than lecturing him, and when asked about Trump comments she couldn’t defend, she simply deflected the questions.  While prepping the candidate for the final debate in Las Vegas, Trump’s team drove home one answer, literally dozens of times. With Trump having spent days talking about a “rigged” election, the inner circle drilled him to say that while the media were unfair, of course he would accept the outcome on Election Day. He was explicitly warned that any other answer would guarantee 48 hours of bad press, wiping out the rest of the debate.  But when Chris Wallace asked that very question, Trump went rogue. He said he didn’t know what he would do and would keep the country in suspense. As Steve Bannon, Conway and their team watched, their faces fell. They could not believe it. A modified statement was issued the following day, but Trump, before the last mass audience of the campaign, was defiant. He went with his gut. Those who knew him best knew the truth: He would not be managed.  Trump attempted a reset by giving what was touted as a major policy speech in Gettysburg, where he would unveil a detailed Contract with the American Voter.  But Trump spent several minutes ripping the nine women who had accused him of sexual misconduct, calling them liars and vowing to sue them after the election.  The press, naturally, took the bait. A presidential candidate threatening litigation against women who accused him of unwanted groping and kissing was a hotter story than a laundry list of proposals, as Trump, after decades of dealing with the New York tabloids, undoubtedly knew.  Trump had again stepped on his own story, much to the chagrin of his advisers. Some believed he was so frustrated by the allegations, and having to deny them to his wife Melania, that he couldn’t resist fighting back in his signature style.  **  On Friday, Oct. 28, Trump was in a lousy mood. He was supposed to fly to New Hampshire for a campaign event, but he was two hours late in leaving Trump Tower. Instead, trailing in the polls, he spent 45 minutes complaining about how he had been trashed on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” a show he frequented during the primaries but now regularly attacked.  By the time he landed in New Hampshire, the stunning story about James Comey launching a new FBI probe of Clinton’s emails had broken. Trump huddled with Bannon, the campaign chairman, policy aide Steve Miller and Lewandowski, now an informal adviser. Bannon, whose low-key demeanor tended to keep Trump calm, urged restraint.  While retired Gen. Michael Flynn had to keep warming up the crowd beyond his usual one-minute spiel, Bannon helped add a few sentences to Trump’s speech on the teleprompter.  “Perhaps finally justice will be served … Clinton’s corruption is on a scale we have never seen before,’’ Trump told the Manchester crowd.  The aides promptly canceled scheduled interviews with two New Hampshire stations and a taping for “Meet the Press.” Trump’s inclination was to do a TV blitz, but most of the advisers wanted him to go dark, and for several days he did. Every day he wasn’t on television, they believed, he was winning — especially while Clinton had become the story.  If Trump was doing interviews, they argued, he would be asked about every damaging story in the papers. Isn’t it true, an anchor would ask, that you avoided hundreds of millions of dollars in income taxes by using a dubious loophole? Isn’t it true that you claimed credit for major charitable donations that you didn’t make? And Trump would inevitably toss out the talking points and aggressively defend himself, drawing attention from the FBI probe that had cast a pall over Clinton’s campaign.  Instead, an energized Trump, buoyed by the tightening polls, stuck to the prepared speeches, surrendering the TV weapon that had powered his rise to the nomination and beyond. “Stay on point, Donald,” his advisers would insist, and this time Trump complied, except for one swipe at NBC’s Katy Tur during a rally, which drew negative attention.  His strategists kept some of their internal polls from him -- such as one showing him trailing by low double digits in New York -- because they knew he would want to campaign there rather than in swing states he might actually win. After a year and a half, they finally had the candidate on track and on message.  Trump’s team was a bit deflated when Comey cleared Clinton on the new batch of emails less than 48 hours before Election Day, figuring that lifted a cloud -- and was worth a point to Hillary in such do-or-die states as Michigan, Pennsylvania and New Hampshire. The important thing was that Trump was fired up, he saw a path to 270, months after many pundits predicted he would be the biggest loser since Barry Goldwater. And for Trump, as he raced to the final flurry of rallies, mindset was everything.  He couldn't resist calling into Fox twice on Election Day, breaking his media silence and drawing the question that had dogged him for weeks: What if he lost? "I have to see, and under what circumstances," the candidate told Martha MacCallum, again invoking a "rigged system" less than four hours before the first polls closed.  In the end, that question was moot. Trump and his team knew from their internal reports, perhaps two hours before the AP and the networks called the race, that he had accomplished what everyone said was impossible.  Trump's defiance enabled him to pull off a "miracle," which is what Politico had said on Tuesday morning that he would need. The man who broke every rule in the political handbook had captured the White House.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
Donald Trump, the real estate mogul mocked and minimized by the media and political establishment, has stunned the world with a death-defying campaign that has captured the presidency.  The real estate mogul, mocked and minimized by many in the media and criticized by his own party’s establishment, wound up doing far more than avoiding the landslide loss that so many prognosticators predicted after the conventions. The man who had never run for public office, who had supposedly alienated so many women and minorities that he had no serious chance, somehow captured the highest office in the land.  It was not until 2:30 am that first the AP, then the Washington Post and Wall Street Journal, then Fox News, declared Trump to be the 45th president.  There was a sense of disbelief, even shock, among journalists on and off the air as states like Ohio, North Carolina and Florida fell into the Trump column and Clinton failed to put away the big blue Midwestern states. Once Trump was within 54 electoral votes of winning the White House, the entire conversation changed:  How did Trump do this?  How could Clinton have blown this?  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  How could we have missed this?  How would this guy govern?  Some media figures lashed out on Twitter. ABC's Martha Raddatz choked back tears as she discussed the Trump presidency.  It was a version of what has gone on since the billionaire came down the Trump Tower escalator last year, when he was treated as an entertaining figure but not as a plausible president. The Huffington Post was less than gracious at the end: "Nightmare: President Trump."  The mainstream media mindset was clear going into Tuesday--“Trump Hopes for a Miracle,” Politico declared—and few believed he would carry the half-dozen states that would get him to the magic 270.  I have been sounding this alarm for a year and a half—not that Trump would win, but that he could win. That there was a reason he beat the Republican establishment. That the coastal-elite media didn’t just underestimate the anger and frustration in much of the country, but had little ability to understand it.  Trump wound up providing a night of unexpected suspense, to the point where the Dow futures plunged 3 percent and the New York Times at one point gave him the edge.  In the end, the system wasn’t rigged. A former first lady, senator and secretary of state couldn’t beat a rich guy who spent his career building hotels, casinos and golf courses along with running a reality show.  The campaign was so endless and ugly, and the nominees so relentlessly reviled, that Clinton’s potential status as the nation’s first female president seemed almost to slip off the radar.    Public attention will quickly shift to how Trump govern a bitterly divided country, even with the help of a Republican Congress and facing an embittered Democratic minority. He will also face a news business that he has decried as corrupt and dishonest.  The conventional wisdom is that gridlock will continue to grip the nation’s capital, precisely the condition that has left so many Americans disgusted by a broken political system. But Trump has defied expectations many times.  The 2016 election, which seemed to shatter cultural norms, ended with an outcome that the people who run the country had great difficulty imagining: President Trump.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
So the November surprise is that the October surprise didn’t count.  That’s not quite true, but captures the dizzying end to the 2016 campaign, which saw James Comey again announce that Hillary Clinton is under criminal investigation nine days before the election, and then exonerate her less than 48 hours before the voting begins.  Which raises the question of whether he should have gone public in the first place, given that the new “evidence”—not reviewed at the time—turned out to be mostly duplicate and personal emails.  It’s not much of a bumper sticker, but I guess Clinton can claim to be the only candidate cleared twice by the FBI.  Comey’s move undercuts Donald Trump’s claim that Clinton’s election could spark a constitutional crisis, but not his overall rhetoric about a culture of corruption. Yet the damage has been done, fueling arguments by Comey’s critics that he unfairly politicized the last stretch of the campaign.  Comey’s Oct. 28 letter to Capitol Hill transformed the campaign, put Clinton on the defensive, energized Trump and had some impact on the polls, which were already tightening. I said at the time that we just didn’t know whether the new cache of emails—which weirdly wound up on Anthony Weiner’s computer, via Huma Abedin—would be incriminating or a nothing-burger.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  There’s even a school of thought that Comey’s second letter late Sunday doesn’t help Clinton because it brings the focus back to the email scandal just when she’s trying to make a closing argument.  The Clinton camp is obviously relieved. And once again, we have partisan reactions on both sides.  Trump had been ripping Comey’s July decision not to seek an indictment against Clinton as evidence of a “rigged system.” When the FBI chief made the new inquiry public, Trump praised him for “guts.” Now he is questioning how the bureau could have reviewed 650,000 emails in such a short period of time.  Newt Gingrich, a major Trump ally, says the FBI boss caved: “Comey must be under enormous political pressure to cave like this and announce something he can't possibly know.”  On the other side, New York Times columnist Paul Krugman rips into Comey:  “The election was rigged by James Comey, the director of the F.B.I. His job is to police crime — but instead he used his position to spread innuendo and influence the election. Was he deliberately putting a thumb on the electoral scales, or was he simply bullied by Republican operatives? It doesn’t matter: He abused his office, shamefully.”  Washington Post editorial writer Stephen Stromberg is also critical:  “If you have ever watched a procedural crime drama, you probably recognize the words, ‘the jury will disregard.’ It is the instruction judges give jurors to ignore inadmissible testimony after it has already been offered in open court. Of course the jury, composed of human beings, cannot forget what it has already heard — even if they try. The integrity of the proceedings have already been damaged.”  There’s also chatter about the awkward relationship that Clinton would have with Comey, who serves a fixed 10-year term and can only be removed for cause, if she wins.  For now, as the candidates wrap up their mad dash to far-flung rallies, Comey’s open-and-shut pronouncements are baked into the cake. That is, along with a separate inquiry into the Clinton Foundation, “Access Hollywood,” the sexual misconduct allegations by a dozen women, “basket of deplorables,” and charges by each nominee that the other is unfit for the White House and would lead us into war.  An incredible melodrama, with the presidency at stake. Oh, and control of the Senate as well. The curtain is finally coming down on this one.  Until Wednesday, when the media will be consumed by sound and fury over the outcome of the election and the prospects for the 45th president—whoever he or she may be.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
The final countdown to tomorrow’s election has become a cacophony, with just about everyone joining in the craziness.  Ann Coulter, the conservative provocateur, writes: “My Final Argument for Trump: Humiliate the Media!”  Susan Sarandon, the Bernie supporter who once flirted with backing Trump, denounced the DNC as “completely corrupt” and told CNN she’s supporting Jill Stein.  Mike Huckabee tweeted that “Trump may be a car wreck, but at least his car is pointed in right direction. Hillary is a drunk-driver going the wrong way on the freeway.” Ringing endorsement, huh?  Actress Ali Wentworth, the wife of George Stephanopoulos, told the Hollywood Reporter that “if Trump wins, we’ll start looking at real estate in Sydney, Australia. No crime, no guns.” No word on whether George has signed off.  Former White House chief of staff John Sununu said at a Trump rally: "Bill was referring to Hillary when he said, 'I did not have sex with that woman.'"  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Seriously.  Some conservatives tweeted a Wikileaks disclosure following this Drudge headline: “WIKI WICCAN: PODESTA PRACTICES OCCULT MAGIC.”  Turns out John Podesta was invited to a dinner last year with performance artist Marina Abramovic, who sometimes does weird occult stuff, but she says it was a “normal dinner” with “no blood, no anything else,” and Podesta wasn’t there, only his brother Tony. So no Satanic rituals for Clinton’s campaign chief.  Meanwhile, as the candidates race to their final rallies and the pundits stand at their color-coded maps, you can sense the relief that this polarizing campaign is finally coming to a close.  I don’t fault all the prognosticators who are looking at red and blue states, early voting, turnout operations, demographic groups, past trends and a plethora of polls to figure out who has the best path to 270. They’re smart people, and this is what they do. This is the pregame chatter on Cubs vs. Indians, and they’re expected to pick winners and losers.  But sometimes it can seem a bit comical. On Friday, CNN put up a “breaking news” barrier that Clinton had dropped below 270 electoral votes. Meaning that CNN’s analysts were projecting she no longer had a lock on the election.  Brian Williams appeared to scold MSNBC and Bloomberg anchor Mark Halperin on the air, saying: “ I think you’ve gone out of your way find the path, argue for the path, forge the path for him in an argumentative way with your co-host to the nomination. Tonight, I thought you were interestingly optimistic. Where are you getting the path of positivity you laid out on your broadcast tonight?”  Halperin responded that he wasn’t being optimistic, he was looking at the data.  But Politico says there’s a “theory” bouncing around on Clinton that “if she takes Nevada, Pennsylvania, North Carolina and Virginia -- all states where she seems to have a lead, or is building one through early voting -- Donald Trump can win Florida, Ohio, Wisconsin, Iowa, Colorado and New Hampshire and still lose.”  Assuming he wins Wisconsin.  And then there are the bettors: “Traders on the website are now paying 68 cents for a ‘Clinton win’ share that would pay $1 if Clinton is elected. Just last week the same share on PredictIt cost 81 cents,” says USA Today.  I’m not sure who’s going to win—and that’s a very different situation than 10 days ago, when we were awash in reports on who was in the running to be Clinton’s interior secretary.  The momentum seems to have broken Trump’s way. In a whole slew of states, including New Hampshire, Colorado, Nevada and Florida, Trump has gone from trailing to significantly ahead or virtually tied, at least according to some polls. And that makes me think that if undecided voters haven’t broken for Hillary by now, they’re not going to—not if this is a change election.  At the same time, Trump is in a position where he has to win every one of a half-dozen or so contested states plus grab a state that Mitt Romney lost. And he has to do this with less money and far less of a ground game than the Clinton operation. So he has less margin for error.  A conventional wisdom has emerged that Trump drops when the news is about him, and Clinton drops when the news is about her. But there’s been a split-screen focus on both of them in recent days.  It’s a funny thing about elections. After all the ads and the attacks, the conventions and the debates, there is still one day where voters have to be motivated enough—perhaps with a nudge from volunteers—to turn out to vote for a candidate. (Yes, that’s been diluted by weeks of early voting, but Nov. 8 will still decide the election.) And that’s where such random factors as bad weather and even a Philadelphia transit strike can be factors.  Starting Wednesday morning, we’ll be up to our eyeballs in exploring why Trump or Clinton won (or lost), the outlook for the new administration, the media’s role in the race, and why the campaign often seemed longer on insults than issues. But right now, it’s a heckuva horse race.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
House Speaker Paul Ryan vowed Wednesday to help lead a “unified Republican government” with Donald Trump as president, promising Americans that the entire party can now work “hand in hand” to solve the country’s problems.  Ryan’s remarks extended an olive branch to Trump, the GOP president-elect with whom he’s had an up-and-down relationship since the start of the 2016 election cycle.  The Wisconsin congressman and leader of the GOP-controlled House said that he’d already spoken twice with Trump and Vice President-elect Mike Pence, a former House member whom Ryan praised for his like-minded conservative principles.  Ryan’s comments also came before returning to Capitol Hill next week to address challenges like ObamaCare and passing a federal budget to avoid a looming government shutdown. And they came amid a divided House Republican Conference, which had already been at odds over the populist, anti-establishment message that Trump will bring to Washington in January.  “With a unified Republican government, we can fix these problems,” Ryan said Wednesday at a press conference in Wisconsin. “What I see is great potential. What I see is a unified government.”  Ryan and Trump have had an uneasy relationship since the start of Trump’s improbable outsider campaign, which began with him vanquishing 16 major candidates in the GOP presidential primaries.  The relationship was at its worst in early October when Ryan said he would stop campaigning for Trump after the release of a 2005 audiotape in which Trump is heard making lewd comments regarding women.  However, Ryan voted for Trump and on Wednesday said he’d spoken to the president-elect twice since he was declared the winner overnight.  “He turned politics on its head,” Ryan said from Wisconsin. “We will work hand in hand.”  He also thanked Trump for pulling several House and Senate Republicans “over the finish line” this election cycle to give the GOP control of the White House and both chambers.  “Donald Trump provided a lot of coattails,” Ryan also said.  Still, Ryan returns to Capitol Hill amid a Republican caucus divided over him abandoning Trump in the final stretch of a then-close race with Democratic rival Hillary Clinton.  Ryan, who in fall 2015 accepted the job of leading the GOP-led House, was already under fire from the chamber’s most conservative wing -- in large part for relying on House Democrats to pass legislation when he couldn’t get the support of rank-and-file Republicans.  During the months-long Capitol Hill recess that ends next week, there have been rumblings about detractors trying to end Ryan’s roughly 14-month-long leadership of the GOP-controlled House.  However, the House Freedom Caucus, part of the chamber’s most conservative faction, has dismissed news reports about an attempt to replace Ryan.  The group is scheduled to meet Nov. 15, upon returning to Capitol Hill.  Virginia GOP Rep. Dave Brat told FoxNews.com on Wednesday that Ryan had indeed identified that Trump had tapped into something the other politicians had missed. However, he urged the speaker to identify exactly what resonated with voters and present that to them.  “We have to put some meat on the bone,” said Brat, who in 2014 ousted House Majority Leader Eric Cantor in a Tea Party-backed effort in which pollsters also gave him low odds of winning. “What is that new thing? What animated this election?”  Meanwhile, the conservative group Freedom Works has proposed postponing the House Republicans’ vote this month to re-appoint Ryan.  The group argues that such a vote should be held after seeing whether Ryan holds to conservative principles during Congress’ lame duck session. The full vote would be held in January.  Ryan on Wednesday also argued that Republicans, with Trump in the White House, now have the opportunity to repeal and replace ObamaCare, outgoing President Obama’s 2010 universal health-care law that has become increasingly expensive for many Americans.  “We weren’t able to pass legislation, but with a unified Republican government, we can fix these problems,” he said.  Republicans went into Election Day with a 54-to-46 majority in the Senate, with Democrats needing to gain just five seats to retake control of the chamber.  As of Wednesday, the GOP still had at least a 51-seat majority in the upper chamber.  “We look forward to working with him,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Wednesday after Trump’s victory. “We’ll be enthusiastically supportive of almost all of his things. And when we have differences, we talk about them privately.”  Republicans were expected to keep control of the House. They entered Election Day with a 59-seat House advantage, so Democrats would have had to gain 30 seats to take control of the chamber. They were expected to pick up 10 to 20 seats, but gained no more than nine.  House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., congratulated Trump and urged him to offer a “robust infrastructure jobs bill” that Congress can “quickly pass” and to protect and defend Americans “in a manner that is strong and smart, and that honors the sacrifices of our men and women in uniform.”  Fox News’ Chad Pergram contributed to this report.
Donald Trump sent shockwaves rippling through America and across the globe Tuesday when voters rallied behind his longshot campaign and handed him victory over Democratic rival Hillary Clinton to make him the 45th president of the United States.  Republicans also kept hold of their majority in the House of Representatives and were close to doing so in the Senate, giving Trump a friendly Congress with which to pass his legislative agenda.  But, amid the slogans of “making America great again” and “draining the swamp,” what exactly does the billionaire businessman have planned for the country? The following is an overview of his agenda, compiled from his campaign website and other platform documents.  Economy  Government Reform  Health Care  Trade  Immigration  National Security
Only days before the presidential election, the FBI released an archive of documents from a long-closed investigation into Bill Clinton's 2001 presidential pardon of a fugitive financier, prompting questions from Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign about its timing.    The release comes amid the bureau's controversially timed review of emails from a Hillary Clinton aide.    The 129 pages of heavily censored material about Bill Clinton's presidential pardon of Marc Rich were published Monday on the FBI's Freedom of Information Act webpage and noted by one of the bureau's Twitter accounts Tuesday. Earlier in October, the FBI unit published historical files as far back as 1966 about Donald Trump's father, Fred Trump.    The Clinton campaign questioned the bureau's decision to make the file public so close to Tuesday's election.    "Absent a (Freedom of Information Act) deadline, this is odd," Clinton campaign spokesman Brian Fallon tweeted. "Will FBI be posting docs on Trumps' housing discrimination in `70s?" Fallon's reference was to news accounts of a 1973 federal housing discrimination lawsuit, later settled, against Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump.    In response to questions Tuesday from The Associated Press, the FBI said that the Marc Rich documents "became available for release and were posted automatically and electronically to the FBI's public reading room in accordance with the law and established procedures." The bureau said that under law, documents requested three or more times are made public "shortly after they are processed." That processing, the bureau said, is on a "first in, first out basis."    Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  White House spokesman Josh Earnest said he saw the FBI tweet shortly before he boarded Air Force One with President Barack Obama for a trip to Columbus, Ohio, to campaign for Hillary Clinton, but was unaware that anyone at the White House was consulted about the material before it was released.    "I've not spoke to anybody who has any awareness of being consulted about that material before it was released," Earnest told reporters traveling with the president.    The newly released FBI documents are from a 2001 federal investigation into Bill Clinton's pardon at the end of his administration of Marc Rich, who was indicted in 1983 and evaded prosecution in Switzerland. Rich died in 2013.    The files briefly cited the Clinton Foundation in connection with a large donation in support of Clinton's presidential library. The FBI documents cited public records showing that an unidentified person donated to "the William J. Clinton Foundation, a foundation that supports the Clinton presidential library."    Rich's ex-wife, Denise Rich, pledged a $450,000 donation to the Clinton Foundation's project to develop and build the presidential facility. The new FBI archive does not name Denise Rich, but FBI agents sought to talk to her as part of the probe into her former husband's pardon.    Despite the extensive redactions, the FBI archive cites evidence being prepared for a federal grand jury, agents' reports and internal memos. Agents appeared to be interested in a New York dinner in which the Rich pardon may have been discussed.    The federal probe started under then-U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White, who now heads the Securities and Exchange Commission for the Obama administration. When White left office in 2003, she was replaced by James Comey, the FBI director now under fire for notifying Congress last week about his agency's decision to review emails to and from Clinton aide Huma Abedin.    The Rich investigation did not lead to federal charges under Comey and the case was closed in 2005.  
It only took until 3pm on Monday to set a new first-day, early-voting record in El Paso County, Texas. By the end of the day, the 19,000-plus participants doubled the old record of 8,000.  Sunshine Castro, who took part in early voting at an El Paso library, said, “I went in there and everybody was surprised that the line went all the way to the other side of the library. I haven’t seen it like that, ever.”  The surge in early-voting interest in Texas may be linked to how close the presidential race is there, compared with previous elections. Data from RealClearPolitics, which combined five Texas presidential polls, shows Hillary Clinton is trailing Donald Trump by just five points. To put that into context, Texas has not been won by a Democrat since Jimmy Carter beat Gerald Ford in 1976.  “I definitely think Texas is a battleground state. We’ve been working towards this for the past several election cycles,” said Iliana Holguin, El Paso County Democrats chairwoman.  But Republicans in El Paso dispute the polls. They say they don't properly take all voters into account, especially first-time voters. They also believe many people are voting for Trump but won’t say so when asked by a pollster.  Bob Pena, with the El Paso County Republicans, said, “They call into this office, I haven’t voted in ten years, I don’t know if my voter registration is still good, or I’ve never voted. This is where much of the impact from the Trump campaign is coming from.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  At the state level, Texas has a Republican majority. The governor and other top elected officials are all Republican, along with all members of the Texas Supreme Court. There also is a Republican majority in the Texas State Legislature.  But El Paso is overwhelmingly Democratic. In fact, most Democrats running for state, county and local office in the area run unopposed. El Paso Democrats are trying to carry their local momentum statewide.  “The polls in Texas are as close as they’ve ever been,” Holquin said. “And so we are really working hard here in El Paso and the Democratic Party all across Texas to make sure that we get our voters out to vote. Because we really think it’s a possibility that this year, Texas is going to turn blue.”  But while Republicans admit the demographics are changing, they don’t see Texas turning blue any time soon - and especially during this election.  “You see twenty times more participation in a Trump rally then you see in a Hillary rally. That’s an important thing that should be measured but it’s not,” Pena said.  In Texas, voters do not register for a political party when they register to vote. Instead, they become a member of a party when they participate in that party’s primary. In this year’s presidential primaries, Republicans had 20 percent voter turnout, while Democrats had 10 percent.  Ray Bogan is a Fox News multimedia reporter based in El Paso, Texas. Follow him on twitter: @RayBogan
©2016 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. All market data delayed 20 minutes. New Privacy - New Terms of Use (What's New) - FAQ
EXCLUSIVE: Hillary Clinton, from the moment her exclusive use of personal email for government business was exposed, has claimed nothing she sent or received was marked classified at the time.  But a 2012 email released by the State Department appears to challenge that claim because it carries a classified code known as a “portion marking” - and that marking was on the email when it was sent directly to Clinton’s account.  The “C” - which means it was marked classified at the confidential level - is in the left-hand-margin and relates to an April 2012 phone call with Malawi's first female president, Joyce Banda, who took power after the death of President Mutharika in 2012.  "(C) Purpose of Call: to offer condolences on the passing of President Mukharika and congratulate President Banda on her recent swearing in."  Everything after that was fully redacted before it was publicly released by the State Department -- a sign that the information was classified at the time and dealt with sensitive government deliberations.  A US government source said there are other Clinton emails with classified markings, or marked classified, beyond the April 2012 document.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  A January 2014 federal government training manual, called "Marking Classified National Security Information," provides a step-by-step guide for reviewing classified information, and allocating classified codes or "portion markings."  "This system requires that standard markings be applied to classified information...Markings shall be uniformly and conspicuously applied to leave no doubt about the classified status of the information, the level of protection required, and the duration of classification."  It adds, "A portion is ordinarily defined as a paragraph, but also includes subjects, titles, graphics, tables, charts, bullet statements, sub-paragraphs, classified signature blocks, bullets and other portions within slide presentations, and the like."  "Portion markings consist of the letters “(U)” for Unclassified, “(C)” for Confidential, “(S)” for Secret, and “(TS)” for Top Secret."  Congressman Mike Pompeo, who sits on the House Intelligence Committee, has read the 22 Top Secret emails too damaging to national security to release, and routinely reviews classified documents.  While he could not speak directly to the April 2012 email, he said, "I've seen information like that often. Often certain parts of a particular message will be unclassified and other parts will be classified and they are almost always marked paragraph by paragraph."  Pompeo added, “If, in fact, it is truly marked confidential that would.. and she read it, that made it to her, that would conflict with what she had previously said."  On Wednesday, Clinton told Bret Baier on Special Report, “the fact is, nothing that I sent or received was marked classified, and nothing has been demonstrated to contradict that. “  Meantime, Clinton confidante Sidney Blumenthal, who spoke to Fox News as part of a book tour to promote his new biolgraphy, "A Self-Made Man: The Political Life of Abraham Lincoln, 1809-1849,"said that the Romanian hacker known as Guccifer -- who claimed to breach Clinton's personal server - may have worked for foreign intelligence.  "Marcel Lazar is a Romanian. He worked from a Russian server. He may well be part of a Russian information operation," Blumenthal explained.  While he said there's no way Lazar compromised Clinton's emails, the hacker told Fox News in a telephone interview before reaching a plea deal with the Justice Department that it was "easy for me, for everybody” to access the Clinton server.  Given more than 2,100 classified emails were on the server, Fox asked Blumenthal if he had a security clearance to handle such material. "I was her friend, and I had no security clearance, nor did I seek it, nor did anyone ever send me anything that was classified. So I had no access to, nor did I send or receive any classified material."  Blumenthal said he expects FBI Director James Comey to publicly confirm that Clinton and her aides did not deliberately compromise the nation's secrets.  "This is the question that is at the center of the Department of Justice FBI investigation: Whether anybody had intent, criminal intent to put classified information outside of the system. I believe that was not the case, and I think then, that we will see a statement coming from the FBI stating that, saying that... I assume that the FBI has an interest in - James Comey, the FBI Director has an interest in acting promptly to resolve this remaining question. But I feel confident about the resolution, " Blumenthal said.  Asked about the April 2012 email, and how the campaign could reconcile the classified marking with Clinton’s public statements, spokesman Brian Fallon did not directly address the issue. "This email was just a request for Secretary Clinton to make a phone call to express condolences over the passing of the President of Malawi. The fact that this email was classified after the fact suggests again that agencies in the government tend to err on the side of classifying even routine matters of diplomacy."  Fox News' Adam Housley contributed to this report.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.  Pamela K. Browne is Senior Executive Producer at the FOX News Channel (FNC) and is Director of Long-Form Series and Specials. Her journalism has been recognized with several awards. Browne first joined FOX in 1997 to launch the news magazine “Fox Files” and later, “War Stories.”


EXCLUSIVE: An email from a top Clinton adviser containing classified military intelligence information, and one from a top aide containing classified information about the Benghazi terror attack, were the documents that kick-started the FBI investigation into the mishandling of classified information, Fox News has learned.  The emails, among thousands on Hillary Clinton's personal server, were released to the Benghazi select committee in May and have been widely discussed but Fox News for the first time has identified which Clinton aides sent them and the subject matter.  The revelation came as the Democratic presidential candidate and former secretary of state tried to brush aside the burgeoning scandal, joking at a campaign event when asked by Fox News whether she had wiped her private server clean, "What, like with a cloth or something? I don't know how it works digitally at all."  Clinton last week handed the FBI her private server, which she used to send, receive and store emails during her four years as secretary of state.  Fox News has identified two of the Benghazi-related emails on the server that were deemed to contain classified information at the time they were sent.  The first was forwarded by Clinton adviser Huma Abedin and contained classified material from military intelligence sources. The 2011 email forwards a warning about how then-Ambassador Chris Stevens was "considering departure from Benghazi" amid deteriorating conditions in a nearby city. The email was mistakenly released by the State Department in full, and is now considered declassified.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  The second was sent by Clinton aide Jake Sullivan and contained classified information as well as sensitive law enforcement information on Benghazi. The partly redacted November 2012 email detailed how Libyan police had arrested "several people" with potential connections to the terror attack.  Abedin and Sullivan now work for the Clinton presidential campaign. A spokeswoman for the intelligence community inspector general confirmed to Fox News that the information was classified at the time it was sent.  But Clinton campaign spokesman Brian Fallon says the information was not classified at the time the emails were sent. In maintaining this position, the campaign pointed to the fact that the State Department shared this judgment, as the Abedin email was released in full by the State Department on its FOIA website. The campaign spokesman acknowledged there is disagreement with the intelligence community inspector general.  A State Department spokesman said they shared Fallon's stance.  The emails are now just a fraction of those under review by the intelligence community. On Tuesday, while Clinton joked about her server's apparently missing contents, Fox News has learned the FBI is aggressively trying to recover the data.  An intelligence source familiar with the review told Fox News that FBI investigators are confident they may be able to recover some of the deleted files, a detail first reported by NBC News.  Yet at the contentious press conference on Tuesday, Clinton insisted anything she did with her email server was "legally permitted."  In the press conference following a Las Vegas town hall meeting Tuesday, Fox News' Ed Henry pressed the Democratic presidential candidate by pointing out that leadership is about taking responsibility.  "Look, Ed, I take responsibility," Clinton replied. "In retrospect, this didn't turn out to be convenient at all and I regret that this has become such a cause celebre. But that does not change the facts. The facts are stubborn -- what I did was legally permitted."  The FBI is holding Clinton's server in protective custody after the intelligence community's inspector general raised concerns recently that classified information had traversed the system.  Clinton told reporters she was "very comfortable that this will eventually get resolved and the American people will have plenty of time to figure it out."  When asked whether she oversaw the process to wipe the server clean, Clinton said, "my personal emails are my personal business. Right? We went through a painstaking process and through 55,000 pages we thought could be worth relating," she continued. "Under the law, that decision is made by the official. I was the official. I made those decisions."  As she departed the room, a reporter asked whether the email scandal will ever end, Clinton turned to reporters shrugged and said, "Nobody talks to me about it other than you guys."  Fox News' Ed Henry and The Associated Press contributed to this report.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.
Shown here is an excerpt of Guccifer's letter sent to Fox News as well as an image of the envelope.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →
©2016 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. All market data delayed 20 minutes. New Privacy - New Terms of Use (What's New) - FAQ
©2016 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. All market data delayed 20 minutes. New Privacy - New Terms of Use (What's New) - FAQ
At least four classified Hillary Clinton emails had their markings changed to a category that shields the content from Congress and the public, Fox News has learned, in what State Department whistleblowers believed to be an effort to hide the true extent of classified information on the former secretary of state’s server.  The changes, which came to light after the first tranche of 296 Benghazi emails was released in May, was confirmed by two sources -- one congressional, the other intelligence. The four emails originally were marked classified after a review by career officials at the State Department. But after a second review by the department's legal office, the designation was switched to "B5" -- also known as "deliberative process," which refers to internal deliberations by the Executive Branch. Such discussions are exempt from public release.  The B5 coding has the effect, according to a congressional source, of dropping the email content "down a deep black hole."  The four mails are separate and distinct from another group of emails identified by the Intelligence Community Inspector General as containing two messages with "Top Secret" information.  A congressional source told Fox that a July 23rd letter to Congress from the Inspector General for the Intelligence Community made passing reference to the incident in the recommendations "...that State FOIA officials implement a dispute resolution process in regard to differences of opinion about classification levels and exemptions. State has not yet provided sufficient information for us to close this recommendations."  According to recent congressional testimony, at least one of the lawyers in the office where the changes were made is Catherine “Kate” Duval, who was at the IRS during the Lois Lerner e-mail scandal and now handles the release of documents to the Benghazi select committee. Duval once worked for the same firm as Clinton's private attorney David Kendall.  Fox News is told there were internal department complaints that Duval, and a second lawyer also linked to Kendall, gave at the very least the appearance of a conflict of interest during the email review. A State Department spokesman did not dispute the basic facts of the incident, confirming to Fox News the disagreement over the four classified emails as well as the internal complaints. But the spokesman said the concerns were unfounded.  The whistleblowers told intelligence community officials that they did not agree with the B5 changes, and the changes had the effect of shielding the full extent of classified content on the server. The incident was referenced in a Washington Times report mid-August, but this is the first time fuller details have been available. Because the emails are now marked B5, or deliberative, it is impossible to know the content and relevance to the congressional and FBI investigations.  The internal State Department disagreement was so significant that it rose to the level of Under Secretary for Management Patrick Kennedy, who is deeply involved in the email controversy, as Clinton's server arrangement required his formal signoff or tacit approval. Asked who signed off on the private server on Tuesday, State Department spokesman Mark Toner said, "I personally don't know."  Conservative group Judicial Watch, which has more than a dozen civil suits in federal courts, is now seeking a deposition of Kennedy in a case scrutinizing Clinton aide Huma Abedin’s controversial status as a special government employee (SGE). “All these issues fall under his responsibility,” Judicial Watch investigator Chris Farrell said.  Asked to respond to the allegations, State Department spokesman John Kirby said, “the Department has complete confidence that its attorneys -- who are almost exclusively career Department lawyers -- perform to the highest professional and ethical standards, including in connection with the review and release of Secretary Clinton’s emails.” A State Department official added that the lawyers do not have the final say on the codes, emphasizing it is a “multi-step review.”  On the appearance of a conflict of interest, Kirby defended Duval as “an exceptional professional and has the Department's utmost confidence … No one at the Department should, in addition to this burden, have her integrity or her excellent work ethic impugned.” And on the connection to Clinton attorney Kendall, “the mere fact of working at a firm does not itself constitute a conflict of interest. This is a large firm, and we are not aware that any counsel working on Clinton-related matters at the Department did so prior to joining the Department.”  A search of this week’s 7,000-page release found 694 emails with the B5 coding, about 10 percent of the total.  Fox News’ Pamela Browne contributed to this report.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.
One of the emails that triggered the FBI probe into Hillary Clinton’s server contained classified intelligence from three different agencies, Fox News has learned – which could mean the State Department violated a President Obama-signed executive order by authorizing its release.  That 2009 order, EO 13526, lays out the rules for "classifying, safeguarding and declassifying national security information." It states that the authority to declassify rests with the intelligence agency that originated the information.  "Information shall be declassified or downgraded by … the official who authorized the original classification ... [or] the originator's current successor," the order says.  One of the two emails that sparked the FBI probe was an April 2011 email from Clinton confidant Huma Abedin that, Fox News has learned, contained intelligence from the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), the National Security Agency (NSA), and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), which oversees aerial imagery, including satellites.  Despite this fact and despite the executive order, the State Department publicly released the email and its intelligence -- which was not theirs to declassify -- onto its website in May as part of the initial release of documents on the 2012 Benghazi attack.  Fox News is told that in late spring, all three agencies confirmed to the intelligence community inspector general that the intelligence was classified when it was sent four years ago by Abedin to Clinton's private account, and remains classified to this day.  Clinton’s campaign and the State Department have maintained that the email was not classified and have framed the issue as a difference of opinion.  "What you're seeing now is a disagreement between agencies saying, 'You know what, they should've.' And the other saying, 'No they shouldn't.' That has nothing to do with me," Clinton told reporters last week.  The State Department spokesman also said last Wednesday they are seeking a second opinion on the classification of some emails from the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, who leads the intelligence community.  “I made clear that we’ve asked the Director of National Intelligence for another assessment of those two, the two that the ICIG had determined should have been classified – or at least portions of which should have been classified top secret. So we’ve asked the DNI to look at that and we’ll see what happens,” spokesman John Kirby said.  But a source close to the email investigation emphasized there is no such appeals process, and the finding that the intelligence was classified by the agencies who owned it is "not negotiable."  A spokesman for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence declined to comment and referred questions to the FBI.  Separately, Fox News has learned that a senior State Department official, Under Secretary Patrick Kennedy, who was deeply involved in the Benghazi controversy, is running interference on the classified email controversy on Capitol Hill.  Two sources confirmed that Kennedy went to Capitol Hill in early July and argued the 2011 Abedin email – which as Fox News first reported kick-started the FBI probe along with a second 2012 email from Clinton aide Jake Sullivan -- did not contain classified material.  To make his case, Kennedy cited a 2011 Irish Times newspaper report about the Libyan revolution, to claim the information was already out there.  One participant found it odd Kennedy insisted on having the discussion in a secure facility for classified information, known as a SCIF, though Kennedy said the Abedin email was unclassified, and the Irish Times story did not contain comparable details.  Also, to defend the State Department's decision to release the email without redactions, Kennedy said a contact at the CIA was in agreement, according to two sources with direct knowledge of the claims, though the intelligence did not come from the CIA.  An agency spokesman declined to comment.  While not directly responding to Fox's questions about Kennedy, and its declassification of intelligence owned by other agencies, a state department spokesman said the department "thoroughly reviewed all of documents we have released on our website and appropriately redacted information exempted from release under the Freedom of Information Act."  "We have taken unprecedented steps to collaborate with the Intelligence Community in that regard and have engaged proactively with Congress to answer their questions," the spokesman told Fox News late Tuesday.  Since the initial tranche of 296 Benghazi emails was released in May, a government official said all of the intelligence agencies have reviewers at the State Department to identify emails that may contain classified material that came from them, in order to avoid a repeat of the Abedin situation.  Catherine Herridge is an award-winning Chief Intelligence correspondent for FOX News Channel (FNC) based in Washington, D.C. She covers intelligence, the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Herridge joined FNC in 1996 as a London-based correspondent.
National Intelligence director James Clapper said Tuesday that the U.S. goal of persuading North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons is probably a "lost cause" and the best hope is to cap its capability.    Clapper's comments come amid mounting concern that the North is moving closer toward having a nuclear-tipped missile that could reach the American mainland. It has conducted two atomic test explosions this year and more than 20 ballistic missile tests.    The State Department said Tuesday there had been no change in policy. U.S. administrations have long demanded that North Korea agree to denuclearization, although aid-for-disarmament negotiations have been stalled for years and sanctions have failed to stop the North's weapons' programs.    Clapper said that while North Korea has yet to test its KN-08 intercontinental ballistic missile, the U.S. already operates on the assumption that Pyongyang potentially has the capability to launch a missile that could reach parts of the United States, particularly Alaska and Hawaii.    "I think the notion of getting the North Koreans to denuclearize is probably a lost cause," Clapper said at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York. He added that the best the U.S. could probably get is some kind of a cap on North Korea's nuclear capabilities.    "They are under siege and they are very paranoid, so the notion of giving up their nuclear capability, whatever it is, is a nonstarter with them," he said.    State Department spokesman John Kirby said he had not seen Clapper's comments but said the U.S. still aims for a resumption of six-nation aid-for-disarmament negotiations that have been stalled since the North pulled out of the talks in 2009.    "We want to continue to see a verifiable, denuclearization of the peninsula. We want to see a return to the six-party talk process, and that means we need to see the North show a willingness and an ability to return to that process which they haven't done yet," Kirby told reporters in Washington.    In the meantime, the Obama administration says it is intent on tightening sanctions on the government of young leader Kim Jong Un, who has doubled down on increasing the North's nuclear arsenal. In addition to its nuclear and missile tests this year, North Korea is also believed to producing more fissile material for bombs. U.S. experts estimate that North Korea has 13 to 21 nuclear weapons, and could have as many as 100 by 2020.    Separately Tuesday, Scott Busby, a senior State Department official for human rights, criticized China's implementation of U.N. sanctions against North Korea that are intended to starve it of revenue for its development of weapons of mass destruction.    Busby, who was speaking at a Washington think tank, said that China's use of a loophole in the sanctions to purchase huge amounts of North Korean coal is "unacceptable." He said coal sales are probably the North's main source of foreign currency.    He said the No. 2 U.S. diplomat, Antony Blinken, will raise that issue when he meets this week with Chinese officials in Beijing.    The U.S. wants China to agree to tighter U.N. sanctions on North Korea in response to a Sept. 9 nuclear test explosion and enforce restrictions already in place.    Busby credited China with a "slight improvement" in its treatment of North Korean asylum seekers who escape across the northern border into China. But he added that China is still repatriating significant numbers of them back to the North.  
President-elect Donald Trump hasn’t minced words about what legacy legislation would be on the chopping block from President Obama's administration.  From the start, Trump has vowed to repeal ObamaCare within his first 100 days in office. His upset victory early Wednesday immediately raises thorny questions about what’s next for a range of hot-button issues – from the vacancy on the Supreme Court to pending trade deals to immigration policy to health care.  The Affordable Care Act, commonly known as ObamaCare, has been a GOP target for many years. Trump claimed in the last few weeks of the election that he might even call a special session of Congress to get it done.  “We will do it, and we will do it very, very quickly,” he promised, discussing the ACA. “It’s a catastrophe.”  Now that he's the president-elect, and Republicans who have tried doggedly for years to repeal the law have retained control of the House and Senate, the party has a potential pathway to unravel the ACA.  "With unified Republican government, we can fix this," House Speaker Paul Ryan said of ObamaCare on Wednesday.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  TRUMP'S AGENDA: WHAT HIS ELECTION MEANS FOR AMERICA  Amid spiking premium costs, Ryan also told The Washington Post Wednesday that the law is "collapsing under its own weight."  Beyond Republicans' blunt opposition to ObamaCare, there are few specifics on how the dismantling and rebuilding of a national health care system would look.  But supporters like Families USA, a liberal consumer-health lobby, organized a midafternoon call with hundreds of ObamaCare advocates in about 40 states to start mapping a grassroots campaign to fend off challenges from a Trump administration.  White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Obama will have the chance to discuss these policies with Trump but said the president's top priority is not his legacy but the millions of Americans who got health insurance under the law.  RBC Royal Bank analyst Frank Morgan said the impact of a Trump win “would likely inject an unhealthy dose of uncertainty” for the health care industry.  During the first quarter of this year, the rate of the country’s uninsured fell below 9 percent for the first time to 8.6 percent.  Still, premium spikes for 2017 are being felt by millions, and helped fuel Trump's presidential bid in the final weeks.  Trump’s victory on Wednesday also has major consequences for the makeup of the Supreme Court. Obama’s outgoing pick, Judge Merrick Garland, appeared certain not to make the bench; Trump’s victory will likely pave the way for the nine-member court to be restored to full capacity, with the court once again leaning right.  “Trump's decisive, map-realigning victory, was in large part won by his focus on the Supreme Court issue,” Ken Blackwell, former Ohio secretary of state who is on the board of numerous conservative organizations, told FoxNews.com. “The American people showed their rejection and disdain for adding more liberals to the Court by voting to re-elect a Republican Senate.”  Blackwell believes Trump’s position on the Supreme Court "seriously and publicly demonstrated his approach to governing when he announced repeatedly that he asked America's pre-eminent legal experts associated with The Federalist Society to provide him a list of the most qualified and experienced judges with solid records of jurisprudence.”  Another Obama legacy item on the line is the Trans Pacific Partnership. The 12-member free-trade agreement pushed by the Obama administration as a way to deepen economic ties has been knocked multiple times by Trump. He has vowed to ditch the deal when sworn in.  “TPP is now in the history dustbin for sure,” Gary Hufbauer, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, told POLITICO Pro. Other trade initiatives including the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trade in Services Agreement are also likely to fall by the wayside.  Whether Trump will follow through on some of his more controversial comments on immigration – building a wall and making Mexico pay for it – as well as his call for "extreme vetting" for immigrants from terror-prone countries has yet to be seen.  Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus downplayed concerns over a mass deportation during an appearance on MSNBC and said, “I think everyone learns as they go through this process.”  He added, “(Trump’s) not calling for mass deportation. He said, no, only people who have committed crimes and only until all of that has been taken care of do we look at what we do next."
The outcome of Tuesday’s grueling White House battle between Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump could determine how the history books remember President Obama, with his legacy on the line as one candidate vows to dismantle the outgoing president’s signature policies and the other pledges to protect his agenda.  From ObamaCare to his court-challenged directives helping illegal immigrants to his controversial environmental regulations, the president’s initiatives and the enduring impact of his historic presidency depend in large part on the next administration and Congress.  Trump and fellow Republicans have sought since the primaries to put Obama on the ballot as much as Clinton, and returned to that theme in the final days of the race.  “Obama’s legacy is on the ballot Tuesday and the people are going to choose whether we want another four years of the same,” Ken Blackwell, former Ohio secretary of state who is on the board of numerous conservative organizations, told FoxNews.com.  Trump lately has been laser-focused on bringing down the Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare. Rallying supporters in Grand Rapids, Mich., overnight, Trump said real change begins with repealing and replacing the law.  That message ramped up at the start of this month’s open enrollment, as Trump and running mate Mike Pence railed against the program’s rising premiums costs. Trump on Monday even claimed credit for getting the government to publish data on ObamaCare premium hikes.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  In an election year marked by intra-party tensions, the health care law has been one area where the Republican Party has united, in opposition. During a radio interview Monday in Milwaukee, House Speaker Paul Ryan reiterated that if Clinton becomes president, the likelihood of wiping ObamaCare off the books becomes an afterthought.  “We actually have a plan to replace ObamaCare,” he said. “All of us have basically gotten a consensus on what our plan is, but we have to win an election to put it in place.”  Clinton countered Trump’s message Monday in Pennsylvania by touting her push to “defend the legacy of President Obama.” Clinton, if elected, may seek changes in the law to address bipartisan concern about rising premiums – but has vowed to defend it as a whole.  The legacy on the line entails far more than ObamaCare. Trump has also vowed to “cancel every unconstitutional executive action, memorandum and order” issued by Obama. This presumably is aimed largely at immigration measures. The Supreme Court already deadlocked on a case about Obama’s actions giving a deportation reprieve to millions of illegal immigrants, leaving a lower order in place that blocks it – but Trump’s immigration approach would likely signal a far tougher approach to enforcement and deportation on many fronts than Obama’s. Trump has called for cancelling all federal funding to so-called “sanctuary cities” and removing more than 2 million criminal illegal immigrants – while also suspending immigration from “terror-prone regions where vetting cannot safely occur,” a drastic change from current policy.  Another key decision on the line is the choice to fill the Supreme Court vacancy. Unless the U.S. Senate changes course and confirms Obama's nominee, appellate court judge Merrick Garland, to fill the ninth seat on the Supreme Court, whoever wins Tuesday would be responsible for selecting a justice who could cast the deciding vote in cases involving everything from climate change to transgender rights to the Second Amendment. This process, too, is a critical factor in whether Obama’s policies remain.  Trump already has a list ready of conservative choices to fill the seat of conservative icon Antonin Scalia.  “If Donald Trump wins and has a Republican Senate, they will cement a conservative lock on the Supreme Court for at least a generation,” Gary Nordlinger, a professor in the graduate school of political management at George Washington University, told FoxNews.com. “If Hillary wins with a Democratic Senate, it could be different.”  On Friday, the Supreme Court announced it would decide whether the Obama administration can legally require public schools to allow transgender students to use bathrooms – just one hot-button issue on the docket.  In another transgender rights case, several states challenged the Obama administration’s May guidance to public schools nationwide to allow transgender students to use the bathrooms of their choice. Many conservatives have accused the Obama administration of overreach and claim it created dangerous conditions for students.  Another one of Obama’s legacy deals that faces strong criticism from both sides of the aisle is the Trans Pacific Partnership.  The giant – and semi-secretive – 12-member free-trade agreement advocated by the outgoing administration aims to deepen economic ties among the 12 nations, cutting taxes and fostering trade to boost economic growth in the process.  Trump has knocked Clinton multiple times on the campaign trail for supporting the TPP while in Obama’s Cabinet – even though she now is withholding her support. On Monday, Trump argued Clinton only got on board after she saw how many voters enthusiastically were against it.  The Republican nominee recently said in Ohio that he believes Clinton, if in a position of power, would try to pass the TPP.  During a trip to Australia in 2012, Clinton said the TTP “sets the gold standard in trade agreements to open free, transparent, fair trade, the kind of environment that has the rule of law and a level playing field.” After she left the Obama administration, Clinton’s rhetoric has shifted, but it’s unclear whether her opposition would stand if certain adjustments are made to the pact.  While key agenda items are at stake, Nordlinger argued Obama’s legacy is cemented in some regards. He credited the 44th president with stabilizing the country’s economy which was “teetering on a true economic meltdown,” and helping “improve the reputation of the United States” globally.  “While some people accuse him of being weak in international affairs, he hasn’t done anything truly stupid,” Nordlinger said. “They aren’t going to take Lincoln out of the Lincoln memorial to put him in there, but all in all, he’s been pretty darn successful.”
An ongoing transit strike in Philadelphia is raising concerns among some Democrats that the stand-off could depress voter turnout in the battleground state's deep-blue stronghold – but union officials say the agency is using Election Day as a scare tactic and unfair bargaining chip.  Thursday marked Day 3 of the strike that’s crippled the commute for thousands of people working in and around Philadelphia.  The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority said in a statement that if the strike looks like it will continue through Nov. 8, the agency will pursue legal action to force the union to lift it for Election Day.  “If we foresee an agreement will not come to pass, SEPTA intends to seek to enjoin the strike for November 8th to ensure that the strike does not prevent any voters from getting to the polls and exercising their right to vote,” the agency said in a written statement Tuesday.  Related Image Expand / Contract Market-Frankford line trains remain idle at a Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) station Tuesday, Nov. 1, 2016 in Upper Darby, Pa., just outside Philadelphia (AP Photo/Jacqueline Larma)  Spokeswoman Carla Showell-Lee says “too much is at stake” for either side to not fully engage in negotiations.  But union sources told FoxNews.com they aren’t taking the bait and say they don’t believe a judge at the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas will sign off on an injunction ordering them back on the job.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  “They talk a good game but they are focused on next Tuesday,” Jamie Horwitz, spokesman for Transport Workers Union Local 234, told FoxNews.com. “We never heard from them for the first 16 hours of the strike.”  The worry among some Democrats is that if voters have a tough time getting to the polls, it could hurt Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton, who is banking on a big win in the city to help her carry the state. Pennsylvania has 20 electoral votes up for grabs and is included on almost every list of important swing states.  A Democrat has won the state every election since 1992 when her husband, former President Bill Clinton, ended a GOP winning streak.  Pennsylvania also is key in the battle for control of the Senate, being among five states where the contest is within 2 percentage points, according to the FiveThirtyEight election analysis site. Democrats need to win five Senate races to win outright control of the upper chamber of Congress. Those hopes rest in part on Democrat Katie McGinty beating incumbent GOP Sen. Pat Toomey.  The American Civil Liberties Union of Pennsylvania told The Christian Science Monitor that they are “concerned about how the strike will affect turnout.”  “Some voters will have difficulty getting to the polls, particularly seniors and people with disabilities,” Sara Mullen, associate director of the ACLU of Pennsylvania, said.  U.S. Rep. Robert Brady, D-Pa., has been acting as a go-between with the union and SEPTA. He told the local ABC affiliate that he’s discussed the strike and possible resolution with the governor, mayor and transportation chairman.  “There’s no money there,” he said, adding that any settlement will come with budget constraints.  As for Election Day, he says the worry is real.  “They should be concerned. I’m concerned. I’m party chairman. I’m real concerned,” Brady said.  The TWU went on a similar strike near Election Day in 2009. Another was narrowly avoided before the 2014 election. In that case, both sides agreed to a temporary deal one day before voters went to the polls.
Donald Trump built his presidential campaign on his reputation as a businessman -- but no matter what happens on Election Day, that business will face a complicated picture as it looks to build a brand that is far more controversial than it was before the 2016 race.  Already, Trump’s hotels, including his newest property in Washington, D.C., are facing challenges. Low occupancy rates at the Trump International Hotel in the nation’s capital forced the company earlier this month to cut prices 50 percent on its own website. The hotel, which had a soft opening last month, held its official ribbon-cutting ceremony Wednesday.  Meanwhile, the latest line of properties, Scion, has dropped the Trump name.  Trump's detractors have openly rooted for the Republican nominee's campaign controversies to tank his business empire. Following the infamous leaked tape of Trump talking about groping women, entrepreneur and Hillary Clinton supporter Mark Cuban tweeted: “Every single @realDonaldTrump hotel and golf course is toast. Done. Over. Bernie Madoff now has a better brand.”  But some analysts suggest that while Trump's properties may be taking a short-term hit, they'll recover.  Branding expert Jim Cusson, president of Theory House told FoxNews.com he believes Trump’s brand will bounce back.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  “The outcome isn’t locked and loaded yet,” Cusson said. “I can’t imagine it will have a sustained impact on business.”  Denise Lee Yong, author of “What Great Brands Do,” agrees.  She believes that while Trump’s more controversial comments have alienated some would-be clients, his run for president has given him a platform to reach an even broader base.  “It might end up being a wash,” she told FoxNews.com.  It’s no secret Trump has routinely used the political stage to promote his personal businesses.  He’s used the backdrop of his hotels and golf courses to give speeches and even plugged the newest luxury project during the Sept. 26 presidential debate. “We’re just opening up on Pennsylvania Avenue, right next to the White House, so if I don’t get there one way, I’m going to get to Pennsylvania Avenue another,” he said.  Trump told The New York Times he is simply “demonstrating his credentials for the presidency at such events by showing the type of efficiencies he would bring to government.”  Former Mitt Romney adviser Kevin Madden isn’t buying it.  “With less than two weeks to go until Election Day, Mr. Trump is repaying them by using their campaign to showcase his hotel. He said he wouldn’t let them down, but he already has,” he told the Times.  Before Trump entered the race, foot traffic to his properties was steady year-over-year, according to an analysis from Foursquare, a location intelligence company that also forecasts business trends.  Since he announced his candidacy in June 2015, foot traffic at Trump-branded hotels, casinos and golf courses in the U.S. has been down. And when primary voting season was in full swing in March 2016, popularity for the Trump brand slid 17-24 percent, according to the report. Among the hardest hit were Trump SoHo and Trump International Hotel & Tower Chicago.  The report also broke down the difference in foot traffic from his properties in reliably red states and those in blue territory.  Many of Trump’s high-end hotels like the Trump International Hotel & Tower Chicago as well as his casinos and golf courses are located in “blue” states and rely on visitors who live in the area.  “Trump’s blue state properties – spread between New York, New Jersey, Illinois and Hawaii – have taken a real dip, with diminishing visits in March and a widening gap that continues straight through July, when share fell 20 percent versus July 2015,” the report said.  A deeper dive suggests that the market share losses have been driven by women.  “Trump properties have seen a double-digit decrease in visits from women this year, with a gap that widened starting in March 2016,” the report said.  His family members and their businesses aren’t immune either.  Critics of the Republican presidential nominee have been urging shoppers to boycott daughter Ivanka Trump’s clothing line as well as the stores that carry it. The #GrabYourWallet campaign was launched by San Francisco marketing specialist Shannon Coulter following the leaked video that surfaced of Trump talking about groping women.  “If Ivanka Trump had distanced herself from the campaign, I would not be boycotting her,” Coulter told The Guardian.  Ivanka Trump’s clothing line, which contains mid-priced, business attire, pulled in about $100 million in revenue last fiscal year, according to G-iii, the apparel giant that manufactures and distributes her line.  The boycott damage may be limited. New York-based Brand Keys conducted market research for Forbes finding that a majority of millennial women with disposable income were still willing to consider buying her clothes and shoes.
The Obama administration is coming under increasing pressure from lawmakers and oil industry groups to stand down after intervening in yet another pipeline dispute – this time, by temporarily suspending construction on the controversial North Dakota Access Pipeline.  The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe has been fighting the pipeline for two years, arguing it could traverse sacred ground and burial sites and pose health problems. Their bid to block the four-state, 1,172-mile pipeline got a boost Friday from the administration, which temporarily halted the project just minutes after U.S. District Judge James Boasberg ruled against the tribe.  The decision to put on hold the $3.8 billion project set off a firestorm among industry leaders and lawmakers who say the administration has overstepped its authority.  Rep. Kevin Cramer, R-N.D., called the reversal “fundamentally unfair” and said it “does nothing to ensure certainty or calm, but rather adds further confusion.”  “It seems more than a little confusing that moments after a federal judge issued an order stating, among other things, that the Corps of Engineers and the pipeline company did everything the law requires of them and more, the Obama Administration decides to change the rules,” Cramer said in a written statement.  According to court records, the company has changed the route on its own dime -- 140 times alone in North Dakota -- to avoid building over burial sites. Ninety-nine percent of the pipeline route, roughly half of which has been completed, crosses private land.  American Petroleum Institute president Jack Gerard said the pipeline should move forward.  “The administration’s recent attempts to change the rules, in the middle of the game, set a dangerous precedent for our country that could threaten other infrastructure projects like bridges, roads and electricity transmission,” Gerard told FoxNews.com in a statement.  North America’s Building Trades Unions President Sean McGarvey also said the government’s intervention “is putting politics ahead of the rule of law.”  “We fear that President Obama has now set a dangerous precedent where political considerations can now thwart or delay every single infrastructure project moving forward,” McGarvey told FoxNews.com in a written statement.  The White House has defended its decision and on Wednesday, spokesman Josh Earnest shrugged off comparisons to another major pipeline project the administration recently helped thwart, the Keystone XL Pipeline.  “Keystone was subject of intense debate for a number of years,” he said. “Issues related to that are different than this.”  But Brigham McCown, a former acting administrator for the federal Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, voiced concerns. “This could bog down or delay every single infrastructure project moving forward,” he told The Chicago Tribune. “I don’t think they even realize the can of worms they’ve opened.”  For its part, Energy Transfer Partners, the company behind the project, said it is committed to completing the pipeline and would “obey the rules and trust the process.”  Blueprints for the North Dakota pipeline show construction would stretch from the Bakken Formation – an underground deposit of oil and natural gas where North Dakota and Montana meet Canada – into Iowa, Illinois and South Dakota.  Without a doubt, the untapped potential in Bakken is huge. According to the U.S. Geological Survey, an estimated 7.4 billion barrels of oil could be there. Upon completion, the pipeline could shuttle 470,000 barrels of crude in a 24-hour cycle – enough to produce more than 374 million gallons of gasoline a day.  Proponents say the pipeline would create 8,000 to 12,000 construction jobs and pump an estimated $156 million in sales and income taxes into the economy. The pipeline is projected to generate an estimated $55 million annually in property taxes in North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa and Illinois.  Those against the pipeline argue that environmental concerns – water contamination and greenhouse gas emissions – outweigh any economic benefits.  The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, which sued to stop construction on the pipeline, praised the administration’s last-minute intervention.  The tribe has 15,000 members nationwide and about 6,000 to 8,000 members living on tribal lands in North Dakota. They believe building the pipeline is irresponsible and would leave the land and water vulnerable to contamination from oil spills and would damage historic and culturally significant sites including ancient burial grounds, Dave Archambault II, Standing Rock tribal chairman, told FoxNews.com.  Archambault called the administration’s last-minute assistance “commendable” and “courageous.”  “Our indigenous people never had an opportunity to weigh in,” he said. “We have been expressing our concerns for the past two years but nobody heard us.”  The movement to stop the pipeline recently has been gaining ground.  Protesters on Tuesday swarmed construction workers northwest of the main protest site in North Dakota, while two others chained themselves to the equipment. Twenty people face criminal trespassing charges.  Multi-city coordinated protests popped up across the country this week, in Atlanta, Washington, D.C. and Los Angeles. In Atlanta, those opposed to the pipeline held signs and banners while chanting “oil kills.”  In Washington, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., called on Obama to take permanent action to stop the controversial oil project from going forward.  “We cannot allow our drinking water to be poisoned so that a handful of fossil fuel companies can make even more in profits,” Sanders said.  Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein also recently got herself into hot water when she spray-painted construction equipment at one of the protest sites. She and her running mate, Ajamu Baraka, were charged with misdemeanor counts of criminal trespass and criminal mischief.
As Hillary Clinton's numbers take a hit in the polls, the Democratic ticket is deploying a potentially potent surrogate to the campaign trail: Anne Holton.  The wife of Clinton running mate Tim Kaine -- and daughter of a former Republican governor in the swing state of Virginia -- increasingly is stepping out on her own to stump for the Democratic presidential nominee.  She's no stranger to politics. Holton has an accomplished legal and political resume, as a former lawyer and judge, and ex-Virginia education secretary – a role she resigned from in July to focus on the campaign. In that respect, she is in a unique position to push Clinton’s education platform. She also could be used to help shore up support among women voters who may be having second thoughts about Clinton.  “Because Hillary Clinton’s favorability and trust numbers are so low – she needs help … and it’s the kind of help Bill Clinton is unable to provide,” said Matthew Dallek, an associate professor of political science at George Washington University.  The Democratic presidential nominee's popularity hit a new low among registered voters in a recent Washington Post/ABC News poll. In it, 41 percent of Americans said they have a positive view of Clinton while 56 percent have a negative view. Her popularity among women sank to 45-52 percent, practically a reversal from a month prior.  Though former President Clinton can speak to his wife’s accomplishments, it’s arguably tougher for him to present her as a relatable figure to women voters who may be on the fence.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Enter Holton.  On the stump, Holton is just as comfortable highlighting Clinton’s role as a new grandmother, sometimes receiving “awwws” from audience members, as she is focusing on the particulars of the candidate's education platform.  She recently met with students, supporters and educators at four different stops in New Hampshire. Then it was on to Roanoke, Va., Holton’s hometown, last Friday. She toured Virginia Western Community College and pushed Clinton proposals to make college tuition free for some students. She also stopped by a local campaign office for a volunteer appreciation event and made additional stops in the state on Monday, before hitting up a fundraiser with her husband in Norfolk on Friday.  On a recent stop at a Richmond campaign office, Holton gave volunteers a pep talk, The Associated Press reported.  “This has been a month — a whirlwind,” Holton said. “Tim told me on the phone this morning that ... he has been in 24 states in 30 days,” she said. “I have not. But I’ve had some fun on the trail, too. ... It is crazy and wild. Our lives have been turned topsy-turvy. But for such a great cause. And we’re thrilled to be part of it.”  Dallek said it is "a bit unusual" for the spouse of a vice presidential nominee to play such a prominent role, but said Holton "is a political factor and public expert in her own right.”  “She has a really interesting background and comes from a very political family,” Dallek said.  Holton, a popular former first lady of Virginia when Kaine was governor, also is the daughter of A. Linwood Holton, Jr., a moderate Republican who in 1970 became the first GOP governor to be elected in the state in nearly a century.  Holton’s father worked to integrate the schools in response to court-ordered desegregation, even sending a young Anne Holton to attend a public school in Richmond with a black student majority.  Though it doesn’t seem too radical today, at the time, it was groundbreaking.  “It was my first real experience of being with people who came from a much different background than mine,” she recently said during a visit to Pittsburgh. “I did learn some things about differences, but I learned a lot more about similarities.”  The Clinton campaign, which signs off on Holton's public appearances, declined an interview request from FoxNews.com.  On the Republican side, vice presidential nominee Mike Pence’s wife, Karen Pence, hasn’t been as visible as Holton but is starting to show up more on the trail.  Two weeks ago, Karen Pence, who also has an accomplished background in education, accompanied her husband on a swing through Georgia.
President Obama and his Democratic allies are seizing on the exodus of private insurers from ObamaCare markets to renew their push for a so-called "public option" -- but Republicans say more "government intervention" is not the answer to the latest Affordable Care Act woes.  A public option -- or insurance plan offered by the government -- had been written into early versions of the bill but failed to make the final cut in the law signed by Obama in March 2010.  But with many states seeing private insurers exit ObamaCare markets amid concerns over cost and other factors, Democrats see a silver lining to what critics are calling another ObamaCare crisis -- a reason to bring the option back.  “Now, based on experience with the ACA, I think Congress should revisit a public plan to compete alongside private insurers in areas of the country where competition is limited,” Obama wrote last month in the Journal of the American Medical Association.  The president called on his White House successor and Congress to implement the option. A former Obama health official, Ezekiel Emanuel, also backed up the president in a recent op-ed. And ex-Obama campaign manager David Plouffe added his support in an interview with NBC's "Meet the Press."  If elected, Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton says she’ll look for ways to improve ObamaCare, which includes supporting a public option.  Her Republican rival Donald Trump and several GOP lawmakers, though, say the public option isn’t an option at all.  Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., who is seeking a 6th term, has been a vocal opponent of ObamaCare from the start and maintains “the whole thing is collapsing like a house of cards.”  “Now that the law is unraveling, it’s no surprise that Democrats are clamoring for a so-called ‘public option,’” McCain told FoxNews.com in a statement. “If anything is clear about this failed law, it’s that more government intervention is the wrong solution to fixing our health care system.”  Arizona is bracing for double-digit premium hikes next year. Residents in Pinal County, in the central part of the state, are set to have no insurer options on the ObamaCare marketplace.  It’s a trend that’s expected to spread as major insurers like UnitedHealth, Blue Cross Blue Shield and Humana report millions in losses tied to the ACA. In order to stop the fiscal bleeding, insurers have been increasing premiums, scaling back expansion efforts or in some cases exiting the marketplace entirely.  Before Aetna announced it would leave Arizona and other states, the company proposed an 18 percent premium rate hike to cover its losses.  McCain, like other Republicans, believes the situation is so dire that the only way to fix it is to scrap the law completely and start over.  Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell recently told a group of Kentucky business leaders that the health care law is “crashing” under the weight of rising premiums.  The Republican lawmaker said he had no doubt ObamaCare would be “revisited” by the next president but that the extent of changes depends on who’s elected to the White House and which party controls Congress.  Twenty-four Republican senators are up for reelection this year compared with only 10 Democrats. To take control in the Senate, Democrats need to pick up as many as five seats. If Clinton wins, Democrats would only need four seats since the vice president casts tie breakers.  It’s a different story in the House. To take back the lower chamber, Democrats need to pick up 30 seats – some in deep red states. The best Democrats may be able to hope for is a divided Congress – combative, partisan and gridlocked on major issues like health care reform.  Whether the public option would ease or exacerbate the problem -- by driving more insurers out of the market -- is a matter of debate.  Emanuel, chairman of the Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania who served in the Obama administration from 2009-2011, says the goal is to keep the exchanges stable.  “We should consider a public option triggered when consumers do not have adequate choice,” he wrote in an opinion piece for The Washington Post. “Consumers should never be subject to the whims of insurer withdrawals or withdrawal threats.”
With 75 days before voters pick their new president, email revelations are threatening to overtake Hillary Clinton’s campaign – with WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange hurling another log on an already raging fire with a vow to release “significant” Clinton documents.  In an exclusive interview Wednesday night with Fox News’ Megyn Kelly, Assange was asked whether new information culled from Clinton emails would be released before the general election: "Yes, absolutely.”  Asked whether it could be an election game-changer, Assange told Kelly, “It depends on how it catches fire."  Dana Perino, former White House press secretary under the George W. Bush administration and co-host of Fox News’ “The Five,” predicted Assange would release the files before the third presidential debate, since “it is the one everyone pays attention to.”  WikiLeaks is the same group whose leak of Democratic National Committee files caused havoc for the party on the eve of its July convention.  Clinton herself has tried to downplay the revelations to date, telling CNN there’s “a lot of smoke” but “no fire.”  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  But Assange's threat amounts to one of several looming headaches for the campaign. The State Department is under court order to start reviewing thousands of additional emails for potential release. Clinton is expected to get a set of written questions on her email server soon from her arch-nemesis, the conservative D.C. group Judicial Watch.  Meanwhile, new revelations are surfacing regularly on the access that Clinton Foundation donors enjoyed with her State Department, fueling allegations of pay-to-play practices.  Donald Trump has seized on the last drip-drip of revelations.  “It’s impossible to figure out where the Clinton Foundation ends and the State Department begins,” the New York businessman said at a recent rally in Texas.  On Wednesday, The Associated Press reported that more than half of the non-government people Clinton met while secretary of state gave money to the Clinton Foundation.  The campaign strongly pushed back and accused the wire service of cherry-picking examples that painted Clinton in a negative light. The AP said it stands by its reporting.  But that’s not the only problem for her campaign.  On Monday, U.S. District Judge James Boasberg set a Sept. 22 deadline for the State Department to review nearly 15,000 Clinton emails during her tenure as secretary of state. That means potentially embarrassing emails could be released just ahead of Election Day.  The newest batch includes messages Clinton did not voluntarily turn over to the department last year but were uncovered by the FBI during its investigation into her use of a private email server.  That investigation did not result in any criminal charges being filed against Clinton. The decision was a relief for her campaign heading into the party convention, after which she has enjoyed the polling edge -- albeit a narrowing one in some states -- over Trump.  Still, neither Trump nor Clinton rate very high when voters are asked about “truthfulness.” In an Aug. 3 Fox News Poll, 61 percent of voters said they think Clinton is dishonest.  Boasberg’s September deadline was set on the same day Judicial Watch released hundreds of emails from Clinton’s longtime aide Huma Abedin. The emails reveal more instances of foundation officials seeking what the group called "special" access for donors with her State Department.  One 2009 exchange involving the crown prince of Bahrain, with foundation official Doug Band notifying Abedin the “good friend of ours” was coming to the United States and wanted a sit-down with Clinton. Abedin said the request had to go through “normal channels” but wrote back two days later offering up a morning meeting between the two.  The Clinton Foundation has pushed back strongly on Judicial Watch’s claims.  “Once again this right-wing organization that has been going after the Clintons since the 1990s is distorting facts to make utterly false attacks,” Josh Schwerin, Clinton spokesperson, said in a written statement. “No matter how this group tries to mischaracterize these documents, the fact remains that Hillary Clinton never took action as Secretary of State because of donations to the Clinton Foundation.”  Republicans in Congress also are questioning whether Clinton committed perjury during her marathon 2015 congressional hearing where she testified about her use of a private email server.  Still, South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham told Fox News he’s not holding out much hope.  “At the end of the day nothing's going to happen between now and November,” he said Wednesday. Instead, he believes an outside organization should be brought in to investigate the claims.  He added, “If you’re waiting on this Justice Department to hold anybody in the Obama/Clinton world, you’ll die of old age.”
The Drug Enforcement Administration on Thursday rejected calls to relax a nearly five decade-classification of marijuana as a dangerous drug on par with heroin and ecstasy, dealing a blow to pro-legalization advocates and the budding pot industry.  The DEA, in making its long-awaited announcement, said the decision to keep marijuana as a "Schedule 1" narcotic “is tethered to the science.”  “Right now, the science doesn’t support [the reclassification],” Chuck Rosenberg, acting DEA administrator, said.  In a separate interview with National Public Radio, Rosenberg said the decision “isn’t based on danger” but rather on “whether marijuana, as determined by the FDA, is a safe and effective medicine. And it’s not.”  The government’s decision was announced in the Federal Register. Despite the punt on pot, the DEA did agree to open the door to more medical research on cannabis and its effects.  Currently, marijuana is classified as a “Schedule 1” drug with no “accepted medical use and a high potential for abuse.” That puts it in the same category as ecstasy and gamma-hydroxybutyrate, known commonly as the “date rape” drug.  The decision to keep that classification continues the widening disconnect between state and federal policy.  Twenty-five states have taken matters into their own hands -- sanctioning some form of the plant for medical purposes.  Colorado, Alaska, Washington, Oregon and the District of Columbia have taken it a step further, legalizing its recreational use. And in November, a handful of other states including California, Nevada, Arizona, Massachusetts and Maine, will have recreational or medical marijuana proposals on their ballots.  California Republican Rep. Dana Rohrabacher condemned the DEA’s decision, saying it “shows the disconnect between the Obama administration and the common sense of the American people.”  “The government’s continued allocation of resources and controls with the intent of trying to prevent the adult use of marijuana has been counterproductive and an indefensible limitation of people’s right to control their own lives,” Rohrabacher said in a written statement. “The Obama administration has had the chance to correct a foolish and counterproductive policy. Now it’s up to the Congress and the next administration.”  Rohrabacher co-sponsored legislation with Rep. Sam Farr, D-Calif., that prohibits the Justice Department from using funds to prosecute medical marijuana cases in states where it’s legal.  The federal government has rejected multiple appeals in the past to reclassify marijuana, arguing that its negatives outweigh potential benefits.  “It’s outrageous that federal policy has blocked science or so long,” Rep. Earl Blumenauer, D-Ore., said in a written statement following Thursday’s announcement.  The DEA did indicate it would allow researchers and drug companies to use marijuana grown in other places. Currently, it’s cultivated only at a facility at the University of Mississippi. Increasing the supply and the variety of marijuana made available for scientists seeking to study particular strains of the drug was widely seen as a consolation prize.  While Blumenauer praised the promise of more marijuana research, he maintained the government’s decision doesn’t go far enough and that the DEA “doesn’t get it.”  “Keeping marijuana at Schedule I continues an outdated, failed approach – leaving patients and marijuana businesses trapped between state and federal laws,” he said. “This decision does not address other key concerns like the need for banking services and tax equity for small businesses, operating legally in half the states. It’s not right or fair.”  Some medical professionals like Carl L. Hart, a professor of psychiatry at Columbia University, say changing marijuana’s classification to a “Schedule II” drug would have “represented a major step toward resolving the hypocritical mess that characterizes our current laws on marijuana.”  Hart, who has studied the drug for decades and has had to jump through numerous regulatory and bureaucratic hoops, says the DEA’s punt strips credibility from scientists and researchers who study the drug for medical purposes.  “It’s time we lessened the outside influence of a law enforcement agency on medical decisions and started to rebuild our credibility as scientists on the marijuana issue,” he wrote in Scientific American.  Stuart Titus, CEO of Medical Marijuana, Inc., told FoxNews.com that while Thursday’s DEA decision is a step in the wrong direction, he is optimistic that in the future there will be “a change of mind and a change of attitude.”
Six years after ObamaCare was signed into law – and countless assurances later that the law is “working” – America’s major insurance companies are facing mounting losses and threatening to pull out of the exchanges, leaving customers facing higher costs and fewer options.  In the most recent example, Tennessee regulators are bowing to pressure to let insurers refile their 2017 rate requests, which could lead to steep hikes for customers. A state official acknowledged to The Tennessean they are "not alone" in letting companies seek bigger increases -- as some insurers head for the exits.  Earlier this month, Aetna, once one of ObamaCare’s biggest cheerleaders, slammed the breaks on its expansion plans and became the last of the five major national health insurers to project significant losses tied to the Affordable Care Act.  CEO Mark Bertolini blamed “structural challenges” associated with the health care overhaul and said Aetna intends to withdraw all its “2017 public exchange expansion plans” and undergo “a complete evaluation of future participation in our current 15-state footprint.”  When the health insurance exchanges were first rolled out, the Obama administration strongly pushed a win-win narrative – marketplaces would thrive and Americans who had been unable to afford medical coverage in the past would finally be able to do so.  By January 2016, more than 11.3 million Americans had signed up for ObamaCare. By March, that number had jumped to 20.3 million.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  While clear evidence that the law was expanding coverage, the soaring enrollment numbers have created a fiscal nightmare for insurers which, in turn, has serious consequences for customers.  A majority of new enrollees are considered high risk, meaning insurers will have to spend more money on people in poor health and requiring expensive care.  One by one, the nation’s top insurers – Humana, UnitedHealth Group, Blue Cross and Anthem – have shifted their tone on the law.  Once optimistic, each has reported struggles with plans sold on the exchanges. Many say they weren’t ready for the influx of customers that have generated more claims than predicted.  As a result, companies are scrambling to find ways to cut their losses and stop the fiscal bleeding. A few say they’ll be forced to pass on costs to customers.  Already, rates on the exchanges are skyrocketing. From 2013 to 2016, almost every state has seen an increase in monthly premiums. In Michigan they are expected to jump 17.3 percent this year. In Virginia, the average premium increase could hit 37.1 percent, Bryan Rotella, attorney and founder of the Rotella Legal Group, warns.  “In fact, two of three federal programs to manage this exact risk are due to expire in 2017,” Rotella wrote in an opinion piece for The Hill. “Without these programs to fall back on, many insurance companies likely will need to jack up their premiums even higher or bail out of the exchanges all together.”  Blue Cross reported losing hundreds of millions of dollars on its exchange plans across the country. In Tennessee, it took a $300 million hit; in North Carolina, $280 million and in Arizona, $135 million.  In California, the company is expected to raise rates 19.9 percent – more than triple the average annual increase.  Others like Humana are threatening to quit altogether.  Humana said it will stop marketing its exchange plans, and will only offer individual plans in 156 counties across 11 states -- a decline from the 1,351 counties across 19 states it currently serves.  “We see Humana following a similar path as UnitedHealth in 2017 and expect the company will significantly reduce its overall exposure to the struggling public exchange marketplace,” Scott Fidel, a Credit Suisse Group AG analyst, said.  A February Fitch report said the primary drivers of declining earnings were “cost and utilization trends from the state insurance exchanges.”  In its second-quarter earnings report released Aug. 2, Aetna projects it will lose more than $300 million this year on its plans. As a result, its chief told investors on a conference call that the company will take a long hard look at what can be done to reverse the damage.  In a bid to boost profits that could also affect the options available in the exchanges, Aetna and Humana – and Anthem and Cigna – are trying to merge, decisions under review by state and federal regulators.  UnitedHealth, the country’s largest health insurer, said despite reporting a profit surge in its last quarter, it took a financial hit tied to its ObamaCare coverage.  In 2015, UnitedHealth lost $450 million with ACA plans. The company said it now expects to lose $850 million this year and will scale back its involvement with ACA in 2017. The company, which sold plans in 34 states this year, will only offer policies in three next year – New York, Virginia and Nevada.  The outlook is just as bleak for co-ops set up under ObamaCare to keep insurers competitive.  To date, 70 percent of the original co-ops have folded due to financial strains, with only seven of the original 23 operational.  “The only remaining question is when will all the co-ops collapse, not if,” Josh Archambault, senior fellow at the Foundation for Government Accountability, told FoxNews.com. “Some might take slightly longer than others, but the future looks bleak, even after billions of federal taxpayer dollars were spent to get them off the ground and keep them afloat.”  The problems and possible fixes for ObamaCare are playing a significant a role in this year’s presidential race, too.  Republican nominee Donald Trump claims ObamaCare has cost the country millions of jobs.  “One of my first acts as president will be to repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare, saving another two million jobs,” Trump said during a speech at the Detroit Economic Club.  However, a May study by the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget found that Trump’s plans for ObamaCare would cost the country $550 billion and result in more than 20 million people losing their health care coverage.  Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton has defended the Affordable Care Act on the campaign trail and says if elected, she’ll go after companies who she claims are “gouging American consumers and patients.”  Fox News' Brooke Singman contributed to this report.
The American Beverage Association and others filed a lawsuit Wednesday to try to block a soda tax set to take effect in Philadelphia in January.  The beverage industry had spent more than $10 million fighting the plan before the Philadelphia City Council approved it in June.  The 1.5-cent-per-ounce tax amounts to 18 cents on a 12-ounce can of soda or $1.44 on a six-pack of 16-ounce bottles.  Berkeley, California, has a similar soda tax while Chicago taxes retail soft drink sales and fountain drinks. But soda tax proposals have failed in more than 30 cities and states.  The beverage industry groups, restaurants and consumers who sued complain that the tax duplicates the state sales tax already imposed on soda.  Hotel stays in Philadelphia are also taxed by state and city authorities. However, lawyer Shanin Specter, who filed the soda tax lawsuit, said the city did not get the permission needed from the state to impose a duplicative tax.  Democratic Mayor Jim Kenney sold Philadelphia's council on the soda tax by pledging to spend most of the estimated $90 million in new tax revenue next year to pay for prekindergarten, community schools and recreation centers.  The lawsuit said the tax on both sugary and diet beverages is unfairly based on volume, not price, resulting in a higher tax rate on soda than on more expensive energy or coffee drinks.  "The tax will meaningfully diminish the everyday purchasing power of Philadelphia residents — particularly those on a limited or fixed income — and will put the city's small businesses that sell soft drinks at a material competitive disadvantage relative to comparable businesses just outside the city's borders," the lawsuit said.  Kenney, in a statement Wednesday, said the tax was levied on beverage distributors, not directly on consumers.  "While it is repugnant that the multi-billion-dollar soda industry would try to take away these educational and community programs from the hundreds of thousands of Philadelphians who need them, we were not surprised by their lawsuit given the ten million dollars they have already spent opposing the tax," he said. "I have no doubt we'll be successful in defeating the lawsuit."
Hillary Clinton has a 2-point edge over Donald Trump with less than a week before the election.  That’s according to a new national Fox News Poll of likely voters conducted Tuesday-Thursday.  In the four way race, Clinton tops Trump by a 45-43 percent margin. She was up by three points a week ago (44-41 percent) and by six in mid-October (45-39 percent). Gary Johnson gets 5 percent and Jill Stein two percent. Only four percent are undecided.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Without third-party candidates in the mix, Clinton is ahead by just one point: 46-45 percent. She was up five points in the two-way last week (49-44 percent, October 22-25).  Click here for the full poll results  Her lead is within the poll’s margin of sampling error in both the two-way and four-way races.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Trump is favored by men (+11 points), whites (+19), and whites without a college degree (+33).  Clinton leads among women (+13 points), blacks (+74), and voters under age 30 (+17). She’s also ahead by 11 points among the one-in-five who have already voted (50-39 percent).  They split the support of whites with a college degree: Trump gets 45 percent to Clinton’s 42 percent. In 2012, GOP nominee Mitt Romney won this group by 14 points (56-42 percent).  Both candidates are consolidating their bases, but Clinton outperforms Trump: she gets 90 percent among Democrats and he gets 85 percent of Republicans.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Trump has an 8-point edge over Clinton among independents (41-33 percent). That’s down from his 13-point advantage last week (41-28 percent). Johnson takes 11 percent.  Trump has a six-point strength-of-support advantage, as more of his backers (71 percent) say they “strongly” support their candidate than Clinton supporters (65 percent). In addition, his folks (63 percent) are more likely than hers (54 percent) to be “extremely” interested in the race.  That enthusiasm gap may be one consequence of the renewed FBI investigation into Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was secretary of state. How much damage has the scandal really done to her campaign?  Some 74 percent of voters say the FBI investigation won’t make a difference to their vote, and four percent actually say it makes them more likely to support her. Yet 21 percent say it makes them less likely to vote for her, including 37 percent of Republicans and 21 percent of independents. Among Democrats, 5 percent say it makes them less likely to support Clinton, while 7 percent say it makes them more likely.  “The FBI action forced Clinton to play defense in the closing week,” says Democratic pollster Chris Anderson. “But the number of voters who will move out of her column to someone else will likely be minimal. If the election really comes down to the wire, perhaps it makes a difference in a battleground.” Anderson conducts the Fox News Poll with Republican counterpart Daron Shaw.  Then again, the 59 percent who are bothered by Clinton’s use of a private email server is actually down a touch from 60 percent who felt that way at the end of September. For 39 percent it’s “no big deal.” The emails bother almost all Republicans (92 percent), most independents (69 percent), but just one in five Democrats (22 percent).  While over half of voters, 51 percent, doubt the FBI will find anything that will lead to criminal charges against Clinton, some 47 percent think it will -- including 42 percent of independents and 16 percent of Democrats.  Related Image Expand / Contract  So it’s not surprising that by a 16-point margin, more voters are concerned scandals would have a “serious effect” on a Clinton administration (70 percent) than a Trump administration (54 percent). Moreover, nearly half (46 percent) are “very” worried about scandals if Clinton were elected, up from 37 percent three weeks ago.  Then there’s Clinton’s honesty rating. It ticked up one point to 31 percent. It was a record-low 30 percent among likely voters last week. For Trump, 38 percent say he’s honest and trustworthy. Honesty is one of the only personal traits where he bests her.  Related Image Expand / Contract  “Much of the recent commentary misses the big picture here,” says Shaw. “The specific charges matter less than the fact that they reinforce the broad sense that Clinton’s dishonest. If late-breaking voters decide to make a leap of faith with Trump, it will be because of this feeling.”  Fifty-eight percent say Clinton has the temperament to serve effectively as president, compared to just 40 percent for Trump.  While both candidates remain unpopular, Clinton’s lost her advantage here. Her net negative rating is 13 points (43 favorable vs. 56 unfavorable). Last week she was underwater by 8. At the same time, Trump’s net negative 12 points (43 favorable vs. 55 unfavorable) improved a bit from negative 14 a week ago.  Roughly 15 percent of likely voters dislike both Clinton and Trump. Who are they backing? Clinton and Johnson garner 25 percent each from this group, and 23 percent go for Trump.  The number who think Clinton will win the election is down, yet a majority still thinks she’ll be the next president: 56 percent, down from a high of 66 percent three weeks ago (October 10-12). Still, only 35 percent expect a Trump victory.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Most of her supporters remain confident in their candidate, as 90 percent think it will be Madame President, down slightly from 93 percent in mid-October. At the same time, Trump’s supporters are feeling more confident: 69 percent think he’ll win, up from 56 percent.  Meanwhile, 80 percent of Clinton supporters say they’ll accept the election outcome if Trump wins. That’s down from 88 percent last week. That number holds steady among Trump supporters, as 58 percent say they’ll accept the outcome if Clinton wins.  Nearly three-out-of-four will go to the voting booth unhappy with Uncle Sam: 46 percent are “dissatisfied” with the way the federal government is working and another 27 percent are “angry.” Trump backers are four times as likely as those supporting Clinton to say they’re angry (44 vs. 11 percent).  Clinton’s lost ground on the issues. For example, the new poll finds likely voters trust her over Trump on making decisions about using nuclear weapons by 16 points. That’s down from a 25-point lead in mid-October.  The two candidates tie on nominating the next Supreme Court justice and handling terrorism. Clinton has consistently been preferred on the court, and in five of the six previous polls she had the edge on terrorism.  Related Image Expand / Contract  And Trump’s current 8-point advantage over Clinton on handling the economy is his largest yet.  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,211 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from November 1-3, 2016. The survey includes results among 1,107 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus 2.5 percentage points for results among registered voters and plus or minus 3 points among likely voters.
With less than two weeks to go, the race for the White House has narrowed as Hillary Clinton now has a three-point advantage over Donald Trump.  That’s within the margin of error of the national Fox News Poll of likely voters.  Clinton is ahead of Trump by 44-41 percent. Another one-in-ten back a third-party candidate and four percent are undecided. Last week she was up by six points (45-39 percent) and before that by seven (45-38 percent).  Related Image Expand / Contract  The poll, released Wednesday, finds Clinton leads 49-44 percent in the head-to-head matchup. That 5-point advantage is at the edge of the error margin. She was up 7 a week ago (49-42 percent).  CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS.  Trump is helped by increased backing among independents and greater strength of support: 68 percent of those backing Trump support him “strongly,” compared to 61 percent for Clinton.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Independents favor Trump over Clinton by 13 points (41-28 percent). He had a 7-point advantage last week, and two weeks ago they were tied at 35 percent each. Third-party candidates play a role here, as Gary Johnson (14 percent) and Jill Stein (7 percent) receive the combined support of more than one-in-five independents.  Related Image Expand / Contract  In the four-way race, Trump leads among whites (+14 points) and men (+5), although his best groups remain white evangelical Christians (+56) and whites without a college degree (+28).  Clinton has commanding leads among blacks (+77 points), unmarried women (+27), voters under 30 (+18), and women (+10). First-time voters are also more likely to back her (+16).  The candidates garner almost equal backing among the party faithful: 83 percent of Democrats back Clinton, while 81 percent of Republicans support Trump.  “To be competitive, Trump needs to consolidate support among Republicans and carry independents,” says Republican pollster Daron Shaw. “That’s where he’s made in-roads in the last week, mostly by focusing his attention on the economy and Obamacare.” Shaw conducts the Fox News Poll with Democratic counterpart Chris Anderson.  Trump’s substantive strength is the economy. He’s trusted over Clinton by four points, yet that’s the only issue where he bests her. More trust Clinton to handle foreign policy (+15 points), immigration (+3), and terrorism (+3).  Related Image Expand / Contract  Who would voters put across the table with Russian President Vladimir Putin? More trust Clinton to negotiate with Putin by 3 points (47-44 percent among registered voters). That’s down from a 13-point lead on this measure in April (53-40 percent).  All in all, likely voters don’t think Trump is up to the task: less than half think he’s qualified to be president (46 percent) and even fewer feel he has the temperament to serve effectively (36 percent). Plus, over half lack confidence in his judgment in a crisis (56 percent).  Clinton trounces Trump on each of those measures: 64 percent believe she’s qualified, 62 percent say she has the temperament, and 56 percent are confident in her judgment.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Plus, Clinton continues to receive more positive personal ratings. She has a net negative rating of eight points (45 favorable vs. 53 unfavorable), while Trump is underwater by 14 (42 favorable vs. 56 unfavorable). In addition, when undecided voters and those backing third-party candidates are combined, 26 percent have a favorable view of Clinton vs. 18 percent for Trump.  Yet despite Trump’s weaknesses on traits, it’s still a tight race. That’s because, at least in part, lots of folks prioritize issues when deciding their vote. By a 59-28 percent margin, more say their decision is about the issues as opposed to the character of the candidates. Those backing Trump are more likely to be voting on issues than character by a wide 57-point margin (73-16 percent). For Clinton supporters, the choice is more about issues by 12 points (47-35 percent).  Compared to 2008, this is a more character driven election. At that time, voters said issues were more important than personal qualities by a 71-14 percent margin.  "The bottom hasn't fallen out for Trump and Clinton hasn't pulled away, but the race isn’t as close as the 3-point lead suggests,” says Anderson. “Trump needs a solid majority of undecided voters and wavering supporters of third-party candidates, and that’s extremely unlikely since most of them think he lacks the judgment, temperament, and qualifications to be president."  There are a couple of areas where the two are about evenly matched. First, 52 percent feel Clinton “stands up” for people like them, and 49 percent feel that way about Trump.  Also on their honesty -- or lack thereof: a record-low 30 percent of likely voters think Clinton is honest and trustworthy, while 34 percent say Trump is.  Pollpourri  Here are five additional takeaways from the poll.  - 63 percent of Trump’s supporters believe things in the United States generally favor “other people,” rather than people like them. Forty-four percent of Clinton’s supporters feel that way.  - Twice as many voters expect Clinton to win as think Trump will (64-26 percent). Fully 86 percent of Democrats think Clinton will win, while 49 percent of Republicans think Trump will.  - Trump supporters (34 percent) are more than three times as likely as Clinton supporters (10 percent) to say they won’t accept the election outcome if their candidate loses. Eighty-eight percent of Clinton supporters say they’ll accept the outcome, up from 74 percent in September.  - The generic congressional ballot test is also tight: 47 percent back the Democratic candidate in their congressional district, while 45 percent support the Republican. Among those backing the GOP congressional candidate, 79 percent go for Trump in the four-way presidential race. Clinton gets 82 percent of those backing the Democratic candidate.  Related Image Expand / Contract  “Models suggest a 2-point Democratic advantage on the generic ballot would result in a gain of about 11 seats in the House and 4 in the Senate,” says Shaw. “That means the GOP would retain an edge of about 20 seats in the House, while the Senate would be very much up for grabs.”  - The political parties are about evenly matched in popularity among likely voters. The Democratic Party has a net positive rating of four points (51 percent favorable vs. 47 percent unfavorable). The Republican Party has a net negative rating by just one point (48 percent favorable vs. 49 percent unfavorable).  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,309 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from October 22-25, 2016. The survey includes results among 1,221 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus 2.5 percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
Hillary Clinton’s lead over Donald Trump has increased to seven points, as more than half of voters say he is not qualified to be president.  That’s according to a just-released national Fox News Poll of likely voters.  Clinton receives 45 percent to Trump’s 38 percent. Libertarian Gary Johnson is at 7 percent and Green Party candidate Jill Stein gets 3 percent. Last week, Clinton was up by two points in the four-way contest (44-42 percent).  In the two-way matchup, it’s Clinton over Trump by eight (49-41 percent). She had a four-point edge a week ago (48-44 percent, Oct. 3-6).  Clinton’s lead is outside the poll’s margin of sampling error in both the two-way and four-way contests.  Related Image Expand / Contract  The poll, out Thursday, was conducted Monday-Wednesday. The second presidential debate was Sunday. On Friday, The Washington Post made public a hot-mic recording of Trump from Access Hollywood. On the same day, WikiLeaks began its release of hacked emails from the Clinton campaign, revealing more on Monday through Wednesday.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS  In the four-way race, Clinton is favored among non-whites (+62 points), suburban women (+24), women (+19), and voters under 30 (+16). Third party candidates hurt her among younger voters, as about one in four of them go for Johnson or Stein.  Trump’s the pick for men (+5 points), whites (+14), and whites without a college degree (+25).  Since last week, the largest declines in support for him are among women ages 45 and over (down 12 points), voters ages 65+ (down 11), suburban women (down 10), white women with a college degree (down 7), GOP women (down 6), and white college graduates (down 6).  Support for Trump among white evangelical Christians held steady at 68 percent. Typically, however, about three-quarters of white evangelicals vote for the GOP nominee. Trump’s support among regular church-goers dropped eight points, from 53 to 45 percent.  Independents split, giving 35 percent to each Clinton and Trump, with another 21 percent backing Johnson or Stein. Trump was up by 12 points among independents in late September.  Eighty-one percent of Democrats back Clinton and 80 percent of Republicans support Trump.  "If the Republicans are not at rock-bottom, they can certainly see the bottom from where they are," says GOP pollster Daron Shaw, who conducts the Fox News Poll with Democrat Chris Anderson. "If Trump got 90 percent of self-identified Republicans and nothing else -- no Democrats and no independents -- he'd be at 32 percent.”  Trump’s enthusiasm advantage has evaporated: 70 percent of his backers “strongly” supported him last week. That’s 63 percent now. For Clinton, it’s 66 percent, up from 57 percent.  Yet the number of Republicans satisfied with Trump as their nominee is mostly unchanged: 48 percent are happy with him at the top of the ticket vs. 52 percent a month ago.  Among Democrats, 54 percent are happy with Clinton, while 38 percent still wish it were Bernie Sanders.  Overall, 64 percent believe Clinton has the right temperament to serve effectively and 68 percent say she’s qualified to be president.  Related Image Expand / Contract  It’s the opposite for Trump, as 63 percent think he lacks the temperament and 56 percent say he isn’t qualified. For 49 percent, he is “not at all” qualified.  Are the candidates good role models for children? Voters say Clinton is (54 yes vs. 43 no). And Trump is not (20 yes vs. 77 no).  Related Image Expand / Contract  Thirty-three percent say Clinton is honest and trustworthy. For Trump, it’s 32 percent. That’s a four-point drop for him since last week.  “Put simply, the last week has been a disaster for Trump,” says Anderson. “And more than ever, voters think he lacks the temperament and qualifications to be president.”  Trump’s personal ratings also took a hit, while Clinton’s improved. More voters view her negatively than positively by five points (47 favorable vs. 52 unfavorable). Last week she was underwater by nine. Trump’s rating stands at negative 23 (38 favorable vs. 61 unfavorable). That’s eight points more negative today, as he was underwater by 15 a week ago.  Among Republicans, his favorable rating dropped 11 points, from 84 percent to 73 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Clinton now tops Trump on every issue tested. More voters trust her to handle foreign policy (+24 points), health care (+13), terrorism (+11), immigration (+9), and the economy (+3). For the past month, Trump had been the choice on the economy, and the two were about evenly matched on terrorism.  Clinton is preferred to handle health care despite nearly half wanting to get rid of President Obama’s signature law. Forty-nine percent of registered voters want to repeal Obamacare vs. 45 percent who prefer to keep it in place. That’s a more positive rating for the law than the last time the Fox News Poll asked in December 2014. Then it was 58 percent repeal and 38 percent keep.  Meanwhile, a growing number expect another President Clinton. Sixty-five percent think she’ll win in November. That’s 10 points higher than last week (55 percent) -- and 19 higher than June (46 percent). Some 23 percent think Trump will win.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Americans head to the polls in an even worse mood than four years ago. In October 2012, 53 percent of registered voters were dissatisfied with how things were going in the country. Now, 59 percent are dissatisfied.  Even so, 56 percent approve of the job Barack Obama is doing as president. That’s up from 52 percent a week ago -- and a record high for his second term. Moreover, his approval has been 48 percent or better since February.  Pollpourri  Trump’s video troubles and subsequent attacks on GOP leaders are hurting the party. One indication is more registered voters now consider themselves a Democrat than a Republican -- by nine points (44-35 percent), compared to by four points last week (41-37 percent).  Democrats usually hold an advantage over Republicans nationally in party identification, and this year self-identified Democrats have outnumbered self-identified Republicans by an average of three percentage points in Fox News polls.  The poll asks likely voters to choose between the Democratic and Republican candidates in their Congressional district and finds Democrats up by six points, 48-42 percent. Democrats were up by just one at the end of September (44-43 percent).  "The Democrats are now prohibitive favorites to win the presidency, favorites to take the Senate, and it is no longer unthinkable that they could challenge in the House," says Shaw.  Endorsing Trump is still a net positive for Congressional candidates: 27 percent of Republicans say they are more likely to vote for a Congressional candidate who refuses to endorse Trump, yet more -- 39 percent -- say they are less likely to do so.  No matter who wins, voters are concerned scandals will have a “serious effect” on the administration: 66 percent are worried about scandals in a Clinton administration and 63 percent if it’s Trump. More Democrats (54 percent) are concerned about scandals in a Clinton White House than Republicans are about a Trump administration (41 percent).  Forty-eight percent of voters familiar with the video of Trump’s vulgar remarks say it’s a deal breaker for them. Fifteen percent of Republicans and 40 percent of independents also feel that way.  For comparison, 37 percent of voters familiar with Clinton’s leaked emails say transcripts of her speeches to big Wall Street donors are a deal breaker. That includes 11 percent of Democrats and 17 percent of Sanders supporters.  Trump’s attacks on how Clinton has handled her husband’s past controversies with women aren’t sticking. Seventy-two percent think Clinton “stands up” for women. Thirty-eight percent say Trump “respects” women.  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,006 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from October 10-12, 2016. The survey includes results among 917 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
Hillary Clinton is ahead of Donald Trump by 44-42 percent in a new national Fox News Poll. That’s a two-point edge among likely voters for Clinton. She was up by three points last week (43-40 percent) and by one point in mid-September (41-40 percent).  Third party candidates Gary Johnson (6 percent) and Jill Stein (2 percent) are in single digits.  Related Image Expand / Contract  In the head-to-head matchup, Clinton tops Trump by 48-44 percent. It was 49-44 percent last week. Her lead is within the poll’s margin of error in both the two-way and four-way race.  CLICK TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS.  The GOP nominee has the advantage in interest and enthusiasm. Among those backing Trump, 57 percent are “extremely” interested in the election, and 70 percent support him “strongly.” Among Clinton backers, it’s 50 percent “extremely” interested and 57 percent “strongly.”  Related Image Expand / Contract  Trump is preferred among men (+9 points), whites (+16), voters who attend religious services regularly (+17), and whites without a college degree (+21).  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Clinton’s the choice for women (+12 points), voters under age 35 (+16), and non-whites (+55).  Independents are divided: Trump 39 percent vs. Clinton 35 percent, and another 11 percent for Johnson. Last week, they favored Trump by 12 points.  Eighty-seven percent of Democrats back Clinton and 84 percent of Republicans go for Trump.  Clinton bests Trump among first-time voters by 46-32 percent, with Johnson taking 14 percent.  "I think it's pretty clear that Clinton has a slight edge here," says Republican pollster Daron Shaw. "Still, Trump is very much within striking distance largely because his backers are more enthusiastic, and also Johnson and Stein are drawing more support from voters who might otherwise lean toward Clinton."  Likely voters trust Clinton over Trump on handling race relations (+23 points), foreign policy (+17), immigration (+6), and nominating the next Supreme Court justice (+4). They prefer Trump on terrorism (+1 point), the economy (+5), managing tax dollars (+5), and ISIS (+11).  Majorities of voters still dislike the candidates: 54 percent of likely voters have an unfavorable view of Clinton, while 57 percent view Trump negatively. GOP vice presidential nominee Mike Pence receives the best ratings of the four candidates tested, and his favorable rating is up five points among likely voters since last week. More on that later.  Who has the knowledge to be president? Sixty-seven percent say Clinton has it, while only 41 percent think Trump does. In addition, 63 percent say Clinton has the temperament to serve effectively, compared to just 38 percent for Trump.  Related Image Expand / Contract  The candidate ratings on being honest and trustworthy are more evenly matched -- and much lower: 33 percent say Clinton is vs. 36 percent Trump.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Among Democrats, 69 percent think Clinton is honest, 94 percent think she has the right temperament to be president, and 94 percent say she has the knowledge.  Among Republicans, 71 percent think Trump is honest, 76 percent feel he has the temperament, and 78 percent say he has the knowledge.  Meanwhile, by a 9-point margin, voters feel confident Clinton would have good judgment in a crisis: 54 percent confident vs. 45 percent not confident. Trump’s underwater by 10 points on this measure (45-55 percent). Forty-six percent are “not at all” confident Trump would have good judgment in a crisis. Thirty-three percent feel that way about Clinton.  That matters. Judgment is a top trait voters say will influence their presidential pick. Being a strong leader (21 percent), having good judgment in a crisis (20 percent), and bringing change (19 percent) are the three most important candidate characteristics. Next is someone who “tells it like it is” (14 percent) and has the right experience (13 percent). Eleven percent wants someone who “cares” about people like them.  “After the first debate it looked like Clinton might take a meaningful lead,” says Democratic pollster Chris Anderson, who conducts the Fox News Poll along with Shaw. “That hasn’t happened, probably because so many voters view her unfavorably personally. But unless Trump can close the gap on perceptions of temperament and judgment, he remains at a distinct disadvantage in a close race.”  Most voters are unhappy with Uncle Sam. Half are “dissatisfied with the way the government is working” (49 percent). Some 27 percent are “angry.” Angry voters are more than three times as likely to favor Trump over Clinton.  Clinton’s ties to the Obama administration are a mixed bag. President Obama’s job rating has been 50 percent or better since June. Currently, 52 percent of registered voters approve, while 47 percent disapprove of the job he’s doing.  On the other hand, her closeness could hurt her on the economy. By a 15-point margin, registered voters say it feels like the economy is getting worse rather than better (52-37 percent). And that 52 percent who say the economy is getting worse is the highest since 2011.  Pollpourri  Twice as many voters say news about Trump’s tax returns makes them less likely to vote for him. It’s the reverse among Republicans -- three times as many say the tax news makes them more likely to support him.  Trump’s “crooked Hillary” nickname is sticking. Fifty-two percent of registered voters think it’s accurate, up from 49 percent who felt that way in June.  What about Clinton tagging Trump “a fraud”? Forty-eight percent agree with that, up from 43 percent.  All in all, 55 percent think Clinton will win in November. That’s far more than the 33 percent who think it will be President Trump. Nine-out-of-ten of those backing Clinton think she’ll win, while 7-in-10 Trump supporters think he will.  The poll was conducted Monday through Thursday evenings. The voters contacted Wednesday and Thursday were asked about Tuesday’s vice presidential debate. By a 54-34 percent margin, more think Republican Mike Pence won than Democrat Tim Kaine. Indeed, only about half of Democrats feel Kaine won.  Maybe VP debates do matter. After a week of increased attention on the bottom of the ticket, Pence’s popularity is up and Kaine’s is down. Among likely voters, Pence had a net rating of +11 points last week (42 favorable vs. 31 unfavorable). Now he’s at +14 points (47-33 percent).  Related Image Expand / Contract  At the same time, Kaine lost ground and his unfavorable rating increased by nine points. He had a net +12 last week (40 favorable vs. 28 unfavorable). Now he’s at par, with equal numbers viewing him positively and negatively (37-37 percent).  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,006 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from October 3-6, 2016. The survey includes results among 896 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
Hillary Clinton has gained ground on Donald Trump, who has slipped in key measures of the presidential race after the first debate.  First, the horserace. Clinton is ahead of Trump by three percentage points: 43-40 percent in the four-way matchup, according to a new Fox News Poll of likely voters. Her advantage is within the poll’s margin of sampling error. Two weeks ago, Clinton was up by one (41-40 percent).  Related Image Expand / Contract  Third-party candidates Gary Johnson (8 percent) and Jill Stein (4 percent) remain in single digits.  In the two-candidate head-to-head, Clinton tops Trump by five: 49-44 percent. Two weeks ago, Trump was up by one (46-45 percent).  CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS  The consequences of the debate, which voters score as a win for Clinton by nearly three-to-one, are even clearer on other measures. Trump’s honesty rating is down, most still say he doesn’t have the right temperament, and over half wouldn’t be comfortable with him as president.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Meanwhile, more voters now see Clinton as honest than Trump, the number who say she has the right temperament is up, and over half think her long tenure in government is a positive. Plus, her support increased among women, non-whites, and younger voters.  The poll was conducted Tuesday through Thursday, so all interviews were done after Monday night’s debate.  Trump is preferred among men (+17 points), whites (+21), and independents (+12). He’s narrowly ahead among whites with a college degree (+4 points), and has a wide lead among whites without a degree (+35 points).  Clinton leads among women (+20 points), non-whites (+66), and voters under age 45 (+8). She gained with each of those groups since the debate. Compared to two weeks ago, her advantage among women increased by 7 points, by 15 points among non-whites, and 8 among voters under age 45 (the candidates were tied in mid-September).  The candidates receive about equal backing from their party faithful: 83 percent of Democrats back Clinton vs. 81 percent of Republicans for Trump.  Independents favor Trump over Clinton by 41-29 percent, and 21 percent back Johnson.  Clinton’s backers (69 percent) are a bit more likely than Trump’s (64 percent) to say they “strongly” support their candidate.  What’s motivating voters? Fifty-seven percent say fear that the other candidate might win is behind their choice. For 39 percent, it’s enthusiasm for their candidate.  Trump’s supporters (60 percent) are more likely than Clinton’s (52 percent) to be motivated by the fear factor. This could help Trump. “Research shows fear is the most powerful emotion when it comes to turnout,” notes Republican pollster Daron Shaw. “Hope and anger also cause higher turnout, but fear really gets people to the polls.” Shaw conducts the Fox News Poll with Democratic counterpart Chris Anderson.  The big challenge for Trump: just 43 percent of likely voters would be at ease with him as president, while 50 percent would be comfortable with Clinton.  Indeed, nearly half say they would be “not at all” comfortable with Trump in the White House (47 percent).  Related Image Expand / Contract  That’s unsurprising given 59 percent feel the real estate mogul lacks the temperament to serve effectively as president. By comparison, 67 percent say Clinton has the right temperament -- a notable improvement from 59 percent before the debate.  Related Image Expand / Contract  In the debate Trump repeatedly attacked Clinton for being in government for years and accomplishing little. Yet by a 13-point margin, voters see her years in office as a positive, while by a four-point margin they think it’s a bad thing that he’s never been in government.  Related Image Expand / Contract  In addition, the number that believes Trump is honest and trustworthy is down 8 points since mid-September: 31 percent vs. 39 percent. At the same time, Clinton has mostly held steady on this measure: 35 percent now vs. 34 percent two weeks ago.  Both candidates remain largely unpopular: 53 percent have an unfavorable opinion of Clinton, and 55 percent view Trump negatively.  The number one quality voters want in a president is “good judgment in a crisis.” Twenty-six percent say that’s most important, while 18 percent want “a strong leader;” 15 percent want a candidate who “can bring about change,” and 14 percent say someone who “cares about people like me.” Another 13 percent want someone who “tells it like it is” and 12 percent say someone with the “right experience.”  Clinton leads among voters prioritizing judgment (+35 points) and empathy (+22). Trump is ahead among those wanting change (+45 points) and a strong leader (+4).  Likely voters trust Clinton over Trump on foreign policy (+24 points), immigration (+4), terrorism (+3), and crime (+2). More trust Trump on corruption in government (+5) and the economy (+2).  Pollpourri  Nearly three times as many registered voters who watched Monday’s debate say they “honestly think” Clinton won: 61 vs. 21 percent Trump. Twelve percent call it a draw.  Related Image Expand / Contract  The poll also asks them to look into their crystal ball about November: 58 percent of registered voters think Clinton will win. That’s a 12-point increase from 46 percent who felt that way in June. Fully 90 percent of her supporters think she’ll be the next president. Far fewer Trump supporters, 66 percent, are confident he’ll win.  Post-election preview: If their candidate loses, 34 percent of Trump’s supporters and 19 percent of Clinton’s say they won’t accept the election outcome.  President Obama’s approval rating has been at 50 percent or higher since early June. Currently 51 percent of registered voters approve of the job he’s doing, while 46 percent disapprove.  Only 19 percent approve of the current Congress. Nearly three quarters disapprove (74 percent).  Forty-one percent of registered voters think life for the next generation of Americans will be better than life today. That’s up from 36 percent in May. Slightly more -- 43 percent -- expect life will be worse for the next generation, down from 51 percent.  Those who think life will be better are much more likely to back Clinton, while those who think it will be worse go for Trump.  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,009 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from September 27-29, 2016. The survey includes results among 911 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
Donald Trump narrowly leads Hillary Clinton in the battleground states of Nevada, North Carolina, and Ohio.  That’s according to Fox News statewide likely voter polls conducted Sunday through Tuesday evenings.  Trump is helped by strong support from working-class white voters, while Clinton is hurt by a lackluster performance among younger voters and women.  In each state, Trump’s advantage is within the margin of sampling error. Here’s how the numbers breakdown state-by-state:  Nevada  Trump has a three-point advantage over Clinton among likely voters in the Silver State (43-40 percent). Libertarian Gary Johnson receives eight percent. Nevada voters also can cast a ballot for “none of these,” and that option takes four percent. Green Party candidate Jill Stein is not on the ballot in Nevada.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Independents back Trump (42 percent) over Clinton (23 percent) and Johnson (21 percent).  The Democrat is trailing expectations among women and younger voters.  CLICK HERE TO READ THE NEVADA POLL RESULTS  Those under age 45 are almost equally likely to back Clinton (42 percent) as they are to back Trump (39 percent) -- and Johnson garners double-digit support (11 percent).  Women in Nevada backed Barack Obama over Mitt Romney by a 16-point margin in 2012, according to the Fox News Exit Poll. Clinton’s up by just six points.  Both Clinton and Trump supporters have a high degree of vote certainty (93 percent each).  “There is a huge geographic disparity in Nevada,” notes Democratic pollster Chris Anderson, who conducts the Fox News Poll with Republican Daron Shaw. “Clinton is ahead in Vegas and urban areas, while Trump leads outside Vegas and in rural areas -- this is an obvious advantage for Clinton in get-out-the-vote efforts.”  The race is mostly unchanged in a head-to-head matchup without Johnson: Trump 46 vs. Clinton 42 percent.  Views of President Obama’s job performance are divided: 49 percent approve, while 48 percent disapprove. He won Nevada in both 2012 (by 6.7 points) and 2008 (by 12.5 points).  North Carolina  In North Carolina, Trump is up by five points among likely voters. He receives 45 percent to Clinton’s 40 percent, and 6 percent favor Johnson. Stein is not on the ballot.  Whites back Trump by a 31-point margin (58-27 percent), while blacks support Clinton by 82 points (85-3 percent).  Related Image Expand / Contract  Independents favor Trump (41 percent) over Clinton (24 percent) and Johnson (14 percent).  And while voters under age 45 prefer Clinton by 46-32, Johnson gets 11 percent of them.  CLICK HERE TO READ THE NORTH CAROLINA POLL RESULTS  Ninety-five percent of Trump supporters and 90 percent of Clinton backers feel certain of their vote choice.  In the two-way ballot, Trump’s also up five (47-42 percent).  North Carolina was red in 2012 (Romney by two points) and blue in 2008 (Obama by less than one point). By a 50-46 percent margin, more voters disapprove than approve of Obama today.  Ohio  The Buckeye State is another must-win for Trump, and the poll finds him up by five points among likely voters: 42-37 percent. Johnson receives six percent and Stein gets two percent.  Trump’s edge over Clinton comes mainly from independents (+20 points) and working-class whites (+26). Clinton’s up by just three points among women. Obama won them by 11 in 2012.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Most of Clinton’s (89 percent) and Trump’s supporters (88 percent) are certain they will back their candidate.  “Clinton’s mistakes on the campaign trail have driven many disaffected Republicans into Trump’s camp,” says Shaw. “Just as consequential is the fact Trump is ahead of Clinton among independents by 17-20 points in these states. If that holds, he might actually pull this off.”  Meanwhile, by a 58-30 percent margin, voters approve of the job Republican John Kasich is doing as governor. Among those who approve, 45 percent support Trump, 33 percent back Clinton, and 7 percent Johnson.  CLICK HERE TO READ THE OHIO POLL RESULTS  Without third-party candidates in the mix, it’s Trump over Clinton by 45-40 percent.  Currently, 47 percent of voters approve of the job Obama is doing, while 48 percent disapprove. He won Ohio in both 2012 (by three points) and 2008 (by almost five points).  “Trump has been much more disciplined in his comments recently and is almost certainly benefiting from keeping his attacks focused on Clinton as opposed to other Republicans or Gold Star families,” says Anderson.  Meanwhile, Clinton trails Trump by two points among voters living in union households. That voting bloc went for Obama over Romney by 23 points in 2012.  Senate Races  The polls, released Wednesday, also ask about the senate races in these key states, and find the races within the margin of error in Nevada and North Carolina, while Republican Rob Portman holds a double-digit lead in Ohio. In each state, the GOP senate candidate fares slightly better than Trump.  There’s good news for Republicans in Nevada, where they hope to pick up the seat of the retiring Democratic Senate Leader Harry Reid. Joe Heck leads his Democratic opponent Catherine Cortez Masto by seven points: 43-36 percent. Independent American Party candidate Tom Jones trails with 6 percent and “none of these” gets 5 percent.  In North Carolina, incumbent Sen. Richard Burr bests Democratic challenger Deborah Ross by 43-37 percent, with Libertarian Sean Haugh at 6 percent.  Ohio Sen. Rob Portman holds a 14-point lead over Democrat Ted Strickland: 51-37 percent. The incumbent senator tops the former governor by 28 points among independents. Portman also garners the support of most Republicans (88 percent), as well as 15 percent of Democrats. He won the seat in 2010 with 57 percent of the vote.  “Winning the four-to-five seats needed to regain control of the senate becomes a tricky proposition for the Democrats if the GOP gains the Reid seat and Burr holds on,” notes Shaw. “The Democrats have to win their tight races in Pennsylvania and Indiana, and even that might not be enough.”  There’s also a gubernatorial race in North Carolina. Republican incumbent Pat McCrory tops Democrat Roy Cooper by 46-43 percent. Libertarian Lon Cecil receives 3 percent.  The Fox News Poll is conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R). The polls were conducted September 18-20, 2016, by telephone (landline and cellphone) with live interviewers among a sample of likely voters selected from statewide voter files in Nevada (704), North Carolina (734), and Ohio (737). Bilingual interviewers were used in Nevada. In all three states the margin of sampling error is plus or minus 3.5 percentage points for the total sample of likely voters.
Half of likely voters think the country is in such deep trouble that a completely different kind of leader is needed to come in and shake things up.  That sounds like good news for Donald Trump. Yet the latest Fox News Poll also finds a majority of voters don’t think Trump is qualified to be president -- and doesn’t have the right temperament to serve.  “While the race is tight, some underlying attitudes about the candidates heavily favor Hillary Clinton, such as temperament and experience,” says Democratic pollster Chris Anderson, who conducts the Fox News Poll along with Republican pollster Daron Shaw. “These will likely become larger factors as Election Day gets closer and voters start visualizing the candidates in office.”  The poll, released Sunday, finds six-in-ten likely voters think Clinton is qualified to be president (61 percent) and has the right temperament to serve (59 percent). It’s the reverse for Trump, as majorities say he lacks the qualifications (54 percent) and temperament (59 percent).  Related Image Expand / Contract  CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS  On other traits, ratings of the candidates are closely aligned. For instance, only 34 percent think Clinton is honest and trustworthy (64 percent disagree). Trump does a bit better, but he’s still in negative territory: 39 percent say he’s honest vs. 58 percent dishonest.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Their personal ratings are nearly identical: 45 percent of likely voters have a favorable opinion of Clinton, while 54 percent view her unfavorably. For Trump, itis 44-54 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  And voters doubt both candidates’ motivations. Over half think the main reason Clinton (51 percent) and Trump (55 percent) are running is for themselves -- rather than because they are truly interested in serving the country.  Who is seen as being “more in touch with the concerns of people like you?” Voters are split: 45 percent say the former secretary of state, and 44 percent say the real estate mogul.  Meanwhile, nearly half of voters are “tired of Clintons running for president” (47 percent).  Just over half, 53 percent, feel Trump is “too unpredictable to be president,” while 45 percent like the idea of someone who “breaks the mold” running.  Fifty percent of voters say things in the country are so broken that we need “a completely different kind of leader in charge.” Almost as many, 45 percent, think it would be a “mistake to panic and put an unseasoned leader in charge.”  Pollpourri  Over half of American voters lack trust in the government -- and a growing number doubt their fellow citizens when it comes to picking the nation’s leaders.  The new poll asks how much “trust and confidence” they have in the federal government. Forty-three percent of registered voters have a great deal (8 percent) or a fair amount (35 percent) of trust.  That’s an improvement from three years ago, when only 37 percent of registered voters had confidence in Uncle Sam (June 2013). However, it’s down from a high of 56 percent who were confident in 1999.  Currently 56 percent say they have “not much” confidence (38 percent) or none at all (18 percent).  What about the choices the country makes at the ballot box? A narrow 51-percent majority says they have trust and confidence in the “wisdom of the American people when it comes to making good choices on Election Day.” That’s down 15 percentage points from 66 percent who felt that way in 1998 (that’s the last time the Fox News Poll asked the question of registered voters).  There’s not that much difference between Democrats (58 percent) and Republicans (50 percent) when it comes to having faith in the electorate’s voting choices.  But Democrats (62 percent) are more than twice as likely as Republicans (25 percent) to have trust and confidence in the federal government.  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,006 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from September 11-14, 2016. The survey includes results among 867 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
The presidential race is tight. Hillary Clinton tops Donald Trump by just one point among likely voters in the four-way ballot. In the head-to-head matchup, Trump’s up by one point.  Clinton receives 41 percent to Trump’s 40 percent, according to a new Fox News Poll, with Libertarian Gary Johnson at 8 percent and Green Party candidate Jill Stein at 3 percent.  Related Image Expand / Contract  In a two-way matchup, likely voters give Trump the edge over Clinton: 46-45 percent.  The poll, released Thursday, was conducted Sunday through Wednesday evenings, at a time when Clinton faced new questions about her health after falling ill at a 9/11 memorial event.  Related Image Expand / Contract  It’s the first Fox News Poll this season that includes results among likely voters, so a direct comparison can’t be made to previous polls.  An apples-to-apples comparison is possible among registered voters, and the two-way vote trend shows the race has definitely tightened: Clinton was up by 10 points at the beginning of August (49-39 percent). By the end of August she was up 6 points (48-42 percent) -- and now she’s up by just 3 points (46-43 percent).  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL POLL RESULTS  Likely voters are those registered voters who report a high probability they will cast a presidential ballot this year. At this point, fewer non-white and younger voters are saying they intend to vote compared to other groups -- and that hurts Clinton.  “It’s clear what the Clinton campaign needs to do, and that’s make sure non-white and younger voters show up on Election Day,” says Democratic pollster Chris Anderson. “If these traditional Democratic voters turn out at past rates, she probably wins.”  Both tickets have the backing of most of their key voting blocs. In the four-way race, Trump has the advantage among white evangelical Christians (+52 points), whites without a college degree (+31), and men (+13).  Clinton is preferred among non-whites (+51 points), women (+13), and those voters living in households earning less than $50,000 (+16).  Independents prefer Trump over Clinton by 36-31 percent, while 16 percent go for Johnson and 7 percent Stein. Eighty percent of Republicans back Trump, and 81 percent of Democrats support Clinton.  "Lately Trump’s avoided the sort of controversy that undermined his efforts throughout August," says Republican pollster Daron Shaw, who conducts the Fox News Poll along with Anderson. "By allowing Clinton's problems to be the story, he may finally be consolidating Republican support."  Fewer Democrats (77 percent) than Republicans (86 percent) are “extremely” or “very” interested in the presidential election right now.  Related Image Expand / Contract  Even so, supporters on both sides are about equally enthusiastic about their candidate. Almost all of those backing Clinton feel certain they’ll vote for her in November (87 percent) and say it’s important to them she win (91 percent). That’s matched among Trump supporters, as they overwhelmingly say they’re certain to vote for him (90 percent) and it’s important he win (87 percent).  In addition, 53 percent of Clinton’s backers strongly favor her, while 24 percent have some reservations. For Trump, 50 percent strongly favor him and 27 percent have reservations. On both sides, about one in five says their support is driven by dislike of the other candidate.  Seven in ten voters don’t like the way the government is working, including 44 percent who are dissatisfied and 27 percent who are “angry.”  Related Image Expand / Contract  Over half would go even further: 57 percent say the world’s “going to hell in a handbasket.”  “Angry” voters prefer Trump over Clinton (by 54 points), as do “handbasket” voters (by 35 points). That’s driven by the fact that Republicans are nearly three times as likely as Democrats to feel angry about the way the government is working, and about twice as likely to feel the world’s going to hell.  Likely voters trust Trump over Clinton on handling the economy (+7 points) and corruption in government (+11). They favor Clinton on race relations (+24 points), immigration (+5), nominating the next Supreme Court justice (+1), and terrorism/national security (+1).  On immigration, while there’s been some back-and-forth on Trump’s position on deportation, he’s been consistent on building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border. Over half of likely voters disagree with the GOP nominee and oppose building a wall. The same is true among registered voters, which is a change in sentiment. In the past, half or better favored the wall. That shift is mainly due to a double-digit increase in opposition among Democrats.  Seven-in-ten Republicans favor the wall, and a recent Fox News Poll found nearly three in ten favor deporting as many illegal immigrants as possible (August 28-30).  The new poll finds many voters think those favoring deportation are motivated by racism (37 percent say racism is a major factor in favoring deportation and 32 percent minor factor).  Pollpourri  Among registered voters:  -- Republicans split over their nominee, as 50 percent are happy with Trump, while 48 percent wish it were someone else. That’s mostly unchanged since June.  -- 52 percent of Democrats are happy with Clinton at the top of their ticket. That’s down from 58 percent in June. Forty-three percent would rather have Bernie Sanders, up from 37 percent.  -- 12 percent of Republicans who preferred someone else as their nominee defect to Clinton in the four-way ballot. Only five percent of Sanders backers back Trump.  The Fox News Poll is based on landline and cellphone interviews with 1,006 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research (D) and Shaw & Company Research (R) from September 11-14, 2016. The survey includes results among 867 likely voters. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points for results among both registered and likely voters.
If Donald Trump can continue to gain ground in a few key states by next Tuesday, he will win the presidency.  I’m not making any predictions. I’m not for or against Trump. He still faces an uphill climb, given the Democrats’ inherent Electoral College advantage, and would need to grab a major blue state. But with polling gains in such states as Nevada, Colorado, North Carolina and New Hampshire, Trump has enough of a path that with four days to go, he still has a shot.  How, one might ask, is that possible, given the extraordinary media avalanche that has tried to bury him?  How can he still be competitive after most of the country’s newspapers and magazines have not just opposed him, but said he is utterly beyond the pale as a plausible president?  What does that say about the media?  It is beyond dispute that Trump has drawn far more coverage, and far more negative coverage than Hillary Clinton, and that some media critics have applauded this imbalance.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  And the public gets it. Check out this USA Today poll: “By nearly 10-1, all those surveyed say the news media, including major newspapers and TV stations, would like to see Clinton rather than Trump elected. That includes 82 percent of Trump supporters and 74 percent of Clinton supporters.”  On the opinion side, this will give you the flavor of the media opposition. A New York Times editorial says that from the moment he got in the race, “it became clear that Mr. Trump’s views were matters of dangerous impulse and cynical pandering rather than thoughtful politics. Yet he has attracted throngs of Americans who ascribe higher purpose to him than he has demonstrated in a freewheeling campaign marked by bursts of false and outrageous allegations, personal insults, xenophobic nationalism, unapologetic sexism and positions that shift according to his audience and his whims.”  A Washington Post editorial: “Mr. Trump…has shown himself to be bigoted, ignorant, deceitful, narcissistic, vengeful, petty, misogynistic, fiscally reckless, intellectually lazy, contemptuous of democracy and enamored of America’s enemies. As president, he would pose a grave danger to the nation and the world.”  Trump has also been opposed by papers that never endorse, like USA Today; by papers that have never backed a Democrat, like the Arizona Republic (126 years); by magazines that haven’t endorsed in 52 years, like the Atlantic. Plus, Trump has much of the conservative media establishment, including National Review and the Weekly Standard, doggedly against him.  Now the GOP nominee, for his part, has run hard against the “disgustingly dishonest” media. And obviously the media, for all their agenda-setting influence, don’t control the outcome of elections.  But what does it say that most of the media establishment is so relentlessly negative against a guy who is going to win at least 20 states and possibly more?  To me, it goes back to the way the MSM originally dismissed Trump as a sideshow and a joke, a guy who deserved to be in the Huffington Post’s Entertainment section. But it goes far deeper than that.  The reason the media missed the rise of Trump is that they were out of touch with the anger and frustration of so many voters, especially working-class Americans. And even now, there is too little empathy for these voters and too little understanding of what motivates them, especially in certain precincts of New York, Washington and L.A.  Instead, there is plenty of condescension toward these voters, a feeling that they’re racist or xenophobic or just so ill-informed that they don’t realize that Trump is selling them snake oil.  Here is Times columnist Charles Blow declaring Trump an “existential threat,” declaring “with my last breath: America, are you (expletive) kidding?!  “I simply cannot wrap my head around how others with level heads and sound minds can even consider Trump for president of this country and leader of the free world.”  What a message: America, you must be dumb or crazy to support this guy.  Beginning next Wednesday, there will be plenty of hand-wringing about the ugly campaign, the Clinton investigations, the future of the Republican Party and so on. But perhaps the media need to engage in some soul-searching about why a good chunk of the country doesn’t view Trump and his appeal with the utter disdain that they do.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
When CNN dropped Donna Brazile for leaking a town hall question to Hillary Clinton’s campaign, the network said nothing publicly.  Only when a second instance emerged from hacked emails obtained by Wikileaks did CNN announce what it called Brazile’s resignation—in a terse statement.  When critics urged CNN President Jeff Zucker to launch an internal investigation, he did not respond publicly. But word leaked yesterday that he had told his staff in a televised town hall that there had been such a probe, and it was finished.  No findings have been released, and Zucker has not addressed the matter publicly.  All this has added to the swirl of criticism surrounding the woman who is acting chair of the Democratic National Committee and the network where she has been a paid contributor for years. Brazile was vice chair of the DNC when these incidents occurred earlier this year, and temporarily suspended her contract with CNN—and ABC—when she became the party’s interim head.  CNN declined to comment publicly, but a network staffer familiar with the situation said the probe found no wrongdoing by anyone at CNN and that no one at CNN had given Brazile advance questions.  Brazile, who has denied the leaking despite email evidence to the contrary, has left a stain on CNN’s reputation. And Zucker, based on his leaked internal comments, understands this.  “This behavior was completely unacceptable and we are clear, exactly where they came from," Zucker said at the meeting, according to sources quoted by Business Insider. He called it a "very unfortunate situation" but added that “one bad apple, I don't think ruins the entire process. Clearly this was unprofessional and this should not have happened and this has been dealt with."  But how has it been dealt with?  Who gave the advance questions to Brazile, based on the “complete investigation” Zucker says the network has done?  Has anyone been fired or disciplined?  Zucker earlier called Brazile’s conduct “disgusting” on a conference call, according to the Huffington Post. But again, there has been no public comment. In the Monday statement disclosing that CNN has cut its ties with Brazile, the network said only that it was “uncomfortable” with what she had done.  In the first instance, Brazile wrote Clinton aides before a March town hall with Clinton and Bernie Sanders that sometimes she gets the questions in advance. She shared one about gun control, citing precise statistics that were then used by moderator Roland Martin of TVOne, CNN’s partner in the town hall.  Zucker told his staff that CNN would “not partner ever again” with TVOne, according to Business Insider.  The strongest comment after that incident came from CNN anchor Jake Tapper, who said in a radio interview that it was “horrifying” and “unethical.”  In the second instance revealed this week, Brazile wrote to the Clinton camp in advance of a town hall in Flint, Mich., where the water supply has been tainted: “One of the questions directed to HRC tomorrow is from a woman with a rash. Her family has lead poison and she will ask what, if anything, will Hillary do as president to help the ppl of Flint.”  At the town hall, Lee-Ann Walters, a local resident who has a rash she blames on the water supply, asked that very question:  “After my family, the city of Flint, and the children in DC were poisoned by lead, will you make a personal promise to me right now, that as president in your first 100 days in office, you will make it a requirement that all public water systems must remove all lead service lines throughout the entire United States, a notification made to the citizens that have said service lines.”  Clinton said she would make such a commitment, but Walters told Fox News this week she was not satisfied with the answer—and does not know how her question, refined with a CNN producer in advance, got leaked.  Brazile vehemently denied to me after the first story broke that she had gotten advance questions or given them to the Clinton team, calling the accusation ridiculous. But she could not explain her own email saying that she sometimes got such questions in advance.  The veteran pundit grew even more heated in a subsequent interview with Fox’s Megyn Kelly, invoking her religion and complaining about the illegal hacking of emails belonging to Clinton campaign chief John Podesta.  “As a Christian woman, I understand persecution, but I will not stand here and be persecuted because your information is totally false… Podesta’s emails were stolen. You’re so interested in talking about stolen material, you’re like a thief that wants to bring into the night the things that you found,” she said.  Brazile has been a well-liked and well-respected figure around Washington for a long time. But for CNN to have kept her on the payroll while she was also a top DNC official posed the risk that her true loyalty was to her political party, not the network where she offered commentary.  I have no doubt that Zucker and most CNN journalists are appalled that their process in high-profile campaign events has been tarnished. But they can’t resolve the matter without the kind of transparency that news organizations regularly demand from politicians. And that means disclosing the results of the internal investigation and what steps CNN is taking to ensure such an ethical breach doesn’t happen again.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
If Donald Trump wins the White House next week, it will be without the support of the last two presidents named Bush.  That, at least, is what George W. Bush’s nephew told a Republican rally in Texas. And while George P. Bush, a budding politician himself, later told the AP he was just “speculating” that the two family members would potentially vote for Hillary Clinton, it’s pretty clear, given the clan’s tight-knit nature, that this was meant to be a signal.  We already knew, based on a conversation leaked by Democrat Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, that George H.W. Bush plans to vote for Clinton.  It’s a stark reminder that Trump not only clobbered the Republican establishment in winning the nomination, but that as he tries to capture the last few states that would get him to 270, he is doing it despite the opposition of the party poohbahs.  John Kasich announced that he had written in the name of John McCain. Paul Ryan said tersely he had voted for Trump, but in recent weeks has followed a self-imposed policy of talking only about House candidates. If Mitch McConnell has had much to say about Trump lately, I haven’t seen it.  Jason Chaffetz endorsed Trump, un-endorsed him and then re-endorsed him, not exactly a ringing affirmation. The same for Nevada congressman Joe Heck. Kelly Ayotte retracted her debate comment that Trump was a good role model for children. Ted Cruz bombastically refused to endorse Trump in Cleveland, telling people to vote their conscience, before quietly getting back in line.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Clinton is touting the prominent Republicans who are backing her, including Colin Powell, Hank Paulson, Richard Armitage, Michael Chertoff and Brent Scowcroft.  But the truth is that Trump doesn’t really need their support. He is running as a different kind of Republican and assembling a very different kind of coalition.  The very essence of his candidacy, in fact, is to break with the GOP orthodoxy of the past.  The media have made much of the fact that Trump is in danger of losing such reliably red states as Utah and North Carolina. But the fact that he has some hope of snatching away Wisconsin, Michigan or even Pennsylvania—where he’s down 4 points in a poll yesterday--shows that Trump has an appeal to white working-class voters that typical GOP nominees do not.  He is a populist outsider and former Democrat who is more interested in shaking up the system than in meeting an ideological litmus test.  So much of the race has turned on Trump’s persona, and controversial comments, that issues other than immigration have often been overshadowed. But it’s clear that on subjects like trade, entitlements and Russia, he is far from a Ryan Republican.  Of course the regular Republicans would rather have had Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio or even Cruz. Trump doesn’t owe them anything. His relations with the RNC have been strained.  It’s hardly surprising that the Bush family isn’t on the Trump bandwagon. Trump eviscerated “low energy” Jeb during the primaries. He also ripped Bush’s brother for invading Iraq and kept noting that 9/11 happen on his watch.  What’s more, Trump’s build-a-wall platform is the polar opposite of Bush 43’s failed effort at immigration reform. And his insistence on protecting Social Security benefits is a far cry from Bush’s attempt to privatize the program.  Trump often casts the GOP as part of the problem. His “drain the swamp” rallying cry doesn’t exactly distinguish between the two parties that dwell in Washington.  Win or lose, Trump is creating a movement that will either change the Republican Party or break away from the party the Bushes helped build.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
This has turned into the whiplash election, and it’s virtually impossible to keep up with the head-snapping revelations.  Even the most diligent journalist can get vertigo trying to investigate and evaluate each disclosure, which damages Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump and spawns dire predictions that their campaign is toast, only to fade in a news cycle or two.  Some developments that in a “normal” election would badly wound a presidential candidate get meager exposure in the rest of the media because they are overshadowed by other mega-stories. No one has the bandwidth to do it all.  This is more than a mere campaign; its craziness has become the beating heart of American culture, debated in every cubicle and coffee shop and at every level of the increasingly toxic stew of social media.  Just look at the last few weeks:  Democrats and many members of the media have taken up weapons and stormed a place called Comey Island.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  The FBI director shook up the race by revealing a probe of emails that wound up on the laptop of a top aide’s estranged husband under investigation for sending illicit messages to an underage girl.  The New York Times reported that Trump avoided hundreds of millions of dollars in income taxes through a loophole scheme so dubious his own lawyers advised him that the IRS could declare it improper.  The Clinton campaign got advance questions before CNN town halls from a top Democratic Party official who was also a paid contributor at the network, which booted her.  The Washington Post reported that Donald Trump has repeatedly “sought credit for charity he had not given — or had claimed other people’s giving as his own.”  Back on Comey Island, the FBI chief was reported to have argued that the administration shouldn’t accuse Russia of using cyberwarfare to interfere with the presidential campaign because—yes--it would look partisan so close to the election.  Hacked emails revealed that the daughter of the Democratic nominee’s husband, himself a former president, complained that his aides were cashing in on the Clinton Foundation and siphoning money from her parents.  The Trump Foundation was ordered to stop fundraising by the New York attorney general, a Democrat and Clinton supporter.  Clinton’s top advisers, reeling after the email scandal broke, complained that said she had terrible instincts and a pathological aversion to apologizing, according to hacked emails.  Back on Comey Island, the FBI looked into whether Trump’s company had a secret email server communicating with a Russian bank but found no direct link.  A Clinton aide complained in a hacked email that “we…speak in such a tortured, nuanced way when we don’t get any advantage from the nuance, and just wind up looking political.”  Back on Comey Island, the FBI opened a preliminary investigation of Trump’s former campaign manager and his ties to Russian interests, which Paul Manafort said he knew nothing about.  Trump boasted a decade ago on a Hollywood entertainment show that as a celebrity he could grab women by the genitals, which he now dismisses as locker-room talk.  Back on Comey Island, FBI agents were investigating financial and ethical issues at the Clinton Foundation but were told to stand down by top law-enforcement officials, according to the Wall Street Journal.  Eleven women accused Trump of sexually propositioning them or unwanted kissing or touching, all of which he denounced as lies.  Trump held a news conference before a debate with Paula Jones and Kathleen Willey, who have accused Bill Clinton of sexual misconduct, and Juanita Broaddrick, who has accused him of rape, which he has denied.  Hillary Clinton nearly collapsed while getting into a car and belatedly revealed that she had pneumonia.  And, well, I could go on.  Many of these cases prompted media firestorms, complete with predictions that Trump or Clinton would be seriously or even fatally damaged. But then the stories were overtaken by some new allegation or outrage.  In the case of Comey’s renewed email investigation, polls so far suggest that it hasn’t moved the needle much beyond the tightening that was already taking place in the race.  It may well be that we’ve all become numb in this whiplash campaign. The race is so polarized, and public attitudes toward Trump and Clinton so firmly established, that each new front-page headline or cable obsession changes few minds.  Perhaps the only consensus is a sense of relief that this long, strange trip is finally coming to an end.  Howard Kurtz is a Fox News analyst and the host of "MediaBuzz" (Sundays 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET). He is the author of five books and is based in Washington. Follow him at @HowardKurtz. Click here for more information on Howard Kurtz.
House Speaker Paul Ryan described his meeting Thursday with President-elect Donald Trump on Capitol Hill as "exciting" in an interview on "Special Report with Bret Baier," while also elaborating on what the two discussed about the GOP legislative agenda.  After first visiting the White House, Ryan, R-Wis., took Trump on a tour of the Speakers Balcony overlooking the National Mall, the scene of Trump's upcoming inauguration before the two went into a meeting.  "I can tell you, what I got out of Donald Trump today is that this is a man of action," he said.  When Trump emerged from the meeting, he sketched out an initial list of priorities for his presidency.  "We're going to move very strongly on immigration," Trump said. "We will move very strongly on health care. And we're looking at jobs. Big league jobs."  Ryan told Fox News that he and Trump "are on the same page" on securing the border. When asked in regards to building Trump's long-proposed border wall, Ryan said he will "defer to the experts" on the right way to secure the nation's border.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  He also said the two discussed replacing ObamaCare, and the fixing parts of Medicare and Medicaid that were affected by the law.  Ryan pointed to the current state of the Republican party as a major strength for Trump going forward, saying members of the party are "excited" to work with the president-elect. He contrasted that with the current state of the Democratic party in the wake of Hillary Clinton's defeat on Tuesday, which he described as "in turmoil."  The GOP holding both houses of Congress for Trump will be a major difference compared to during the Obama presidency, according to Ryan, who described the previous situation as "extremely frustrating."  "With a unified Republican government we can actually get things done for people in this country," he said.  The upcoming debt ceiling in March will provide "an opportunity" for Republicans, according to Ryan  "Thankfully we're doing it with a Republican president and Republican Congress," he said.
President Obama hosted President-elect Donald Trump at the White House for their first formal meeting Thursday, as the outgoing president and the CEO poised to replace him sought to set aside their many differences and chart a peaceful transition of power in January.  Obama called their discussion "excellent" and "wide-ranging," while stressing the need to "come together" to face common challenges.  Trump called the meeting a “great honor” and said he looked forward to talking with Obama “many, many more times.”  “I could have gone a lot longer,” Trump told reporters of the 90-minute meeting, which originally was planned as a brief sit-down. “We discussed a lot of different situations – some wonderful and some difficulties.”  It was the first time the president and the president-elect have met face-to-face.  Trump also met with Republican leaders on Capitol Hill including House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  Trump told reporters they spoke about immigration, health care and “big-league jobs.”  When a reporter asked if he would ask Congress to ban Muslims -- a reference to his primary campaign pledge, since revised, to suspend Muslim immigration -- Trump said, "Thank you everybody," and walked away.  Earlier at the White House, many anticipated an awkward first meeting between the outgoing and incoming president. Trump was behind the “birther” controversy where he questioned the citizenship of Obama. Trump also ran on a platform that included repealing and replacing Obama’s signature health care law – the Affordable Care Act. The Republican president-elect, who will govern with Congress fully under GOP control, also has vowed dismantle the landmark nuclear accord with Iran.  For his part, Obama aggressively campaigned for Hillary Clinton and against Trump in the weeks leading up to the election.  Obama, though, vowed Wednesday and again Thursday to do everything he can to facilitate a peaceful and orderly transition.  First lady Michelle Obama met with Melania Trump privately in the White House residence, while Vice President Joe Biden prepared to see Vice President-elect Mike Pence later Thursday.  Trump traveled to Washington from New York on his private jet, breaking with protocol by not bringing journalists in his motorcade or on his plane to document his historic visit to the White House. Trump was harshly critical of the media during his campaign and for a time banned news organizations whose coverage he disliked from his events.  As scores of journalists waited to be admitted to the Oval Office to see Obama and Trump together, they saw White House chief of staff Denis McDonough walking along the South Lawn driveway with Jared Kushner, Trump's son-in-law. A handful of Trump aides trailed them.  The show of civility at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue contrasted with postelection scenes of protests across a politically divided country. Demonstrators from New England to the heartland and the West Coast vented against the election winner on Wednesday, chanting "Not my president," burning a papier-mache Trump head, beating a Trump pinata and carrying signs that said "Impeach Trump."  Republicans were emboldened by Trump's stunning victory over Hillary Clinton, giving the GOP control of the White House and both chambers of Congress.  "He just earned a mandate," Ryan said.  In an emotional concession speech, Clinton said her crushing loss was "painful and it will be for a long time" and acknowledged that the nation was "more divided than we thought."  Still, Clinton was gracious in defeat, declaring: "Donald Trump is going to be our president. We owe him an open mind and the chance to lead."  In Washington, Trump's scant transition team sprang into action, culling through personnel lists for top jobs and working through handover plans for government agencies. A person familiar with the transition operations said the personnel process was still in its early stages, but Trump's team was putting a premium on quickly filling key national security posts. The person was not authorized to discuss details by name and spoke on condition of anonymity.  According to an organizational chart for the transition obtained by The Associated Press, Trump was relying on experienced hands to help form his administration. National security planning was being led by former Michigan Rep. Mike Rogers, who previously worked for the FBI. Domestic issues were being handled by Ken Blackwell, a former Cincinnati mayor and Ohio secretary of state.  As president-elect, Trump is entitled to get the same daily intelligence briefing as Obama -- one that includes information on U.S. covert operations, information gleaned about world leaders and other data gathered by America's 17 intelligence agencies. The White House said it would organize two exercises involving multiple agencies to help Trump's team learn how to respond to major domestic incidents.  The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Retiring John Boehner, who handed the House speaker’s gavel to Paul Ryan on Thursday and is ending a nearly 25-year career in Congress, told Fox News he has one big regret: Being unable to secure a “grand bargain” deal to cut spending.  In an exit interview with Fox News’ Bill Hemmer, Boehner reflected on his tumultuous term at the helm of the House. Put simply, he said he “played a role in a fight that’s been going on for over 200 years” over the size of government.  “There’s no winning this fight. It’s going to be this constant struggle,” he said.  But Boehner made clear that he thinks the “grand bargain” budget deal with the White House, which fell apart in 2011, would have gone a long way to addressing the problem. Asked what his biggest regret is, Boehner quickly said: “The debt deal with the president that fell apart. No ifs, ands or buts.”  Both sides have blamed each other for the collapse of that deal, which was aimed at reducing deficits by trillions of dollars and in turn slowing the steady climb of the now-over $18 trillion national debt. Speaking with Fox News, Boehner again asserted “we had an agreement” with the White House, but President Obama “walked away.”  He said the collapse has caused the country to have a “real struggle” with how to address spending and the debt.  "It would have really meant a lot to our economy. It would have meant more for people’s incomes. It would have put our entitlement programs on a stronger foundation,” Boehner said.  Nevertheless, Boehner said he and Obama have a “good relationship,” and said Obama would miss him.  Boehner gave his farewell address on the House floor on Thursday, shortly before Rep. Ryan, the Republican Party’s 2012 vice presidential nominee, was formally elected to replace him.  Boehner told Fox News that he does not have “one ounce of regret” about his decision to retire.  “I’m ready to go,” he said.  Boehner, a Catholic, said his proudest moment was helping facilitate the visit of Pope Francis to Washington and Capitol Hill last month.  Boehner added: “I don’t have any doubt that God put me in this job.”
Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson on Wednesday defended remarks being called insensitive to the victims of the Umpqua Community College massacre, after saying he would have attacked the gunman because "that way we don't all wind up dead."  Appearing on Fox News' "America's Newsroom," Carson called out "silly reporters" for "not being able to understand such a simple concept" because they don't accept him.  "They don't try to listen to what you're saying, they're just trying to find a defect so that they can cause more division," he told co-host Martha MacCallum. "I actually believe the American people are smarter than that and they're not going to allow themselves to be manipulated as much as they have in the past."  When asked by MacCallum if he needs to "get better" at saying what he means as a 2016 candidate after recently taking heat for his belief that a Muslim shouldn't be president, Carson stood firm.  "I'm not going to change and become a vanilla envelope that [the media] can accept," he said. "They're never going to accept me because I don't believe in political correctness. So, I can twist myself into pretzels to fit into their silly little box or I can be who I am. We need people who are willing to stand up and talk what's logical right now."
Donald Trump’s campaign manager took to Twitter Thursday to call on President Obama or Hillary Clinton to speak out against calls for political violence, as unruly post-election protests broke out for the second night in a row in cities across the country.  Police in Portland, Ore. declared that a once peaceful protest was a riot after demonstrators were seen attacking drivers and committing acts of vandalism during their march against Trump’s election Thursday night.  Kellyanne Conway, Trump’s campaign manager, flagged an interview with a woman from a separate protest the night before in Los Angeles. The anti-Trump protester called for people to “fight back,” warning, “There will be casualties on both sides. There will be, because people have to die to make a change in this world.”  Conway tweeted:  Not cool. @POTUS or Hillary should address. 'People Have to Die': Anti-Trump Protester Calls For Violence on CNN https://t.co/NfEqhkrTvu — Kellyanne Conway (@KellyannePolls) November 10, 2016  The president-elect himself has given mixed messages about his views on the unrest.  On Thursday, he blasted “professional protesters” and accused the media of fanning the flames.  Just had a very open and successful presidential election. Now professional protesters, incited by the media, are protesting. Very unfair! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 11, 2016  Predictions Map See the Fox News 2016 battleground prediction map and make your own election projections. See Predictions Map →  By Friday morning, Trump took a different approach.  Love the fact that the small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country. We will all come together and be proud! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) November 11, 2016  Whether the protests are building or dying down remains to be seen.  Portland police said at least 29 people were arrested in the riot Thursday night. According to KPTV, one driver had her windshield smashed and someone painted “Capitalism kills” on a nearby convenience store. Police declared the protest a riot at around 8:30 pm. A riot is a Class C felony in Oregon.  The state Department of Transportation briefly shut down Interstate 5 between the Marquan Bridge and the Fremont Bridge due to the demonstration. Parts of Interstate 84 were also temporarily closed.  Protesters in Portland’s Pearl District were breaking windows of several businesses and some were arming themselves with rocks from a construction site, police said.  KPTV reported that the groups Don’t Shoot Portland and Black Lives Matter combined in Portland to become Portland’s Resistance. The founder told the station that “Trump is going to be our president. We need to save our city and hopefully allow people to come here to be a city where there is hope."  Anti-Trump demonstrations erupted across the U.S. for the second straight night, from Portland to Chicago to New York and parts in between.  In New York City, a large group of demonstrators once again gathered outside Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue Thursday night. They chanted angry slogans and waved banners baring anti-Trump messages.  While Obama and Clinton have not directly addressed the protests, both have called for unity.  Obama met with Trump at the White House on Thursday and once again vowed to help with an orderly transition.  “The peaceful transfer of power is one of the hallmarks of our democracy,” Obama said on Wednesday, reminding Americans “we’re actually all on the same team.”  Clinton, in her concession speech, said: “We must accept this result, and then look to the future. ... Donald Trump is going to be our president. We owe him an open mind and the chance to lead.”  White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest, asked Thursday about the protests, said the president believes the right to free speech should be protected.  He added, “It is a right that should be exercised without violence. And there are people who are disappointed in the outcome. And the president's message in the Rose Garden was it's not surprising that people are disappointed in the outcome, but it's important for us to remember, a day or two after the election, that we're Democrats and Republicans, but we're Americans and patriots first.”  The Associated Press contributed to this report.